A JOURNEY TO THE WESTERN ISLANDS OF SCOTLAND


INCH KEITH


I had desired to visit the Hebrides, or Western Islands of Scotland, so
long, that I scarcely remember how the wish was originally excited; and
was in the Autumn of the year 1773 induced to undertake the journey, by
finding in Mr. Boswell a companion, whose acuteness would help my
inquiry, and whose gaiety of conversation and civility of manners are
sufficient to counteract the inconveniences of travel, in countries less
hospitable than we have passed.

On the eighteenth of August we left Edinburgh, a city too well known to
admit description, and directed our course northward, along the eastern
coast of Scotland, accompanied the first day by another gentleman, who
could stay with us only long enough to shew us how much we lost at
separation.

As we crossed the Frith of Forth, our curiosity was attracted by Inch
Keith, a small island, which neither of my companions had ever visited,
though, lying within their view, it had all their lives solicited their
notice.  Here, by climbing with some difficulty over shattered crags, we
made the first experiment of unfrequented coasts.  Inch Keith is nothing
more than a rock covered with a thin layer of earth, not wholly bare of
grass, and very fertile of thistles.  A small herd of cows grazes
annually upon it in the summer.  It seems never to have afforded to man
or beast a permanent habitation.

We found only the ruins of a small fort, not so injured by time but that
it might be easily restored to its former state.  It seems never to have
been intended as a place of strength, nor was built to endure a siege,
but merely to afford cover to a few soldiers, who perhaps had the charge
of a battery, or were stationed to give signals of approaching danger.
There is therefore no provision of water within the walls, though the
spring is so near, that it might have been easily enclosed.  One of the
stones had this inscription: 'Maria Reg. 1564.'  It has probably been
neglected from the time that the whole island had the same king.

We left this little island with our thoughts employed awhile on the
different appearance that it would have made, if it had been placed at
the same distance from London, with the same facility of approach; with
what emulation of price a few rocky acres would have been purchased, and
with what expensive industry they would have been cultivated and adorned.

When we landed, we found our chaise ready, and passed through Kinghorn,
Kirkaldy, and Cowpar, places not unlike the small or straggling market-
towns in those parts of England where commerce and manufactures have not
yet produced opulence.

Though we were yet in the most populous part of Scotland, and at so small
a distance from the capital, we met few passengers.

The roads are neither rough nor dirty; and it affords a southern stranger
a new kind of pleasure to travel so commodiously without the interruption
of toll-gates.  Where the bottom is rocky, as it seems commonly to be in
Scotland, a smooth way is made indeed with great labour, but it never
wants repairs; and in those parts where adventitious materials are
necessary, the ground once consolidated is rarely broken; for the inland
commerce is not great, nor are heavy commodities often transported
otherwise than by water.  The carriages in common use are small carts,
drawn each by one little horse; and a man seems to derive some degree of
dignity and importance from the reputation of possessing a two-horse
cart.




ST. ANDREWS


At an hour somewhat late we came to St. Andrews, a city once
archiepiscopal; where that university still subsists in which philosophy
was formerly taught by Buchanan, whose name has as fair a claim to
immortality as can be conferred by modern latinity, and perhaps a fairer
than the instability of vernacular languages admits.

We found, that by the interposition of some invisible friend, lodgings
had been provided for us at the house of one of the professors, whose
easy civility quickly made us forget that we were strangers; and in the
whole time of our stay we were gratified by every mode of kindness, and
entertained with all the elegance of lettered hospitality.

In the morning we rose to perambulate a city, which only history shews to
have once flourished, and surveyed the ruins of ancient magnificence, of
which even the ruins cannot long be visible, unless some care be taken to
preserve them; and where is the pleasure of preserving such mournful
memorials?  They have been till very lately so much neglected, that every
man carried away the stones who fancied that he wanted them.

The cathedral, of which the foundations may be still traced, and a small
part of the wall is standing, appears to have been a spacious and
majestick building, not unsuitable to the primacy of the kingdom.  Of the
architecture, the poor remains can hardly exhibit, even to an artist, a
sufficient specimen.  It was demolished, as is well known, in the tumult
and violence of Knox's reformation.

Not far from the cathedral, on the margin of the water, stands a fragment
of the castle, in which the archbishop anciently resided.  It was never
very large, and was built with more attention to security than pleasure.
Cardinal Beatoun is said to have had workmen employed in improving its
fortifications at the time when he was murdered by the ruffians of
reformation, in the manner of which Knox has given what he himself calls
a merry narrative.

The change of religion in Scotland, eager and vehement as it was, raised
an epidemical enthusiasm, compounded of sullen scrupulousness and warlike
ferocity, which, in a people whom idleness resigned to their own
thoughts, and who, conversing only with each other, suffered no dilution
of their zeal from the gradual influx of new opinions, was long
transmitted in its full strength from the old to the young, but by trade
and intercourse with England, is now visibly abating, and giving way too
fast to that laxity of practice and indifference of opinion, in which
men, not sufficiently instructed to find the middle point, too easily
shelter themselves from rigour and constraint.

The city of St. Andrews, when it had lost its archiepiscopal
pre-eminence, gradually decayed: One of its streets is now lost; and in
those that remain, there is silence and solitude of inactive indigence
and gloomy depopulation.

The university, within a few years, consisted of three colleges, but is
now reduced to two; the college of St. Leonard being lately dissolved by
the sale of its buildings and the appropriation of its revenues to the
professors of the two others.  The chapel of the alienated college is yet
standing, a fabrick not inelegant of external structure; but I was
always, by some civil excuse, hindred from entering it.  A decent
attempt, as I was since told, has been made to convert it into a kind of
green-house, by planting its area with shrubs.  This new method of
gardening is unsuccessful; the plants do not hitherto prosper.  To what
use it will next be put I have no pleasure in conjecturing.  It is
something that its present state is at least not ostentatiously
displayed.  Where there is yet shame, there may in time be virtue.

The dissolution of St. Leonard's college was doubtless necessary; but of
that necessity there is reason to complain.  It is surely not without
just reproach, that a nation, of which the commerce is hourly extending,
and the wealth encreasing, denies any participation of its prosperity to
its literary societies; and while its merchants or its nobles are raising
palaces, suffers its universities to moulder into dust.

Of the two colleges yet standing, one is by the institution of its
founder appropriated to Divinity.  It is said to be capable of containing
fifty students; but more than one must occupy a chamber.  The library,
which is of late erection, is not very spacious, but elegant and
luminous.

The doctor, by whom it was shewn, hoped to irritate or subdue my English
vanity by telling me, that we had no such repository of books in England.

Saint Andrews seems to be a place eminently adapted to study and
education, being situated in a populous, yet a cheap country, and
exposing the minds and manners of young men neither to the levity and
dissoluteness of a capital city, nor to the gross luxury of a town of
commerce, places naturally unpropitious to learning; in one the desire of
knowledge easily gives way to the love of pleasure, and in the other, is
in danger of yielding to the love of money.

The students however are represented as at this time not exceeding a
hundred.  Perhaps it may be some obstruction to their increase that there
is no episcopal chapel in the place.  I saw no reason for imputing their
paucity to the present professors; nor can the expence of an academical
education be very reasonably objected.  A student of the highest class
may keep his annual session, or as the English call it, his term, which
lasts seven months, for about fifteen pounds, and one of lower rank for
less than ten; in which board, lodging, and instruction are all included.

The chief magistrate resident in the university, answering to our vice-
chancellor, and to the _rector magnificus_ on the continent, had commonly
the title of Lord Rector; but being addressed only as Mr. Rector in an
inauguratory speech by the present chancellor, he has fallen from his
former dignity of style.  Lordship was very liberally annexed by our
ancestors to any station or character of dignity: They said, the Lord
General, and Lord Ambassador; so we still say, my Lord, to the judge upon
the circuit, and yet retain in our Liturgy the Lords of the Council.

In walking among the ruins of religious buildings, we came to two vaults
over which had formerly stood the house of the sub-prior.  One of the
vaults was inhabited by an old woman, who claimed the right of abode
there, as the widow of a man whose ancestors had possessed the same
gloomy mansion for no less than four generations.  The right, however it
began, was considered as established by legal prescription, and the old
woman lives undisturbed.  She thinks however that she has a claim to
something more than sufferance; for as her husband's name was Bruce, she
is allied to royalty, and told Mr. Boswell that when there were persons
of quality in the place, she was distinguished by some notice; that
indeed she is now neglected, but she spins a thread, has the company of
her cat, and is troublesome to nobody.

Having now seen whatever this ancient city offered to our curiosity, we
left it with good wishes, having reason to be highly pleased with the
attention that was paid us.  But whoever surveys the world must see many
things that give him pain.  The kindness of the professors did not
contribute to abate the uneasy remembrance of an university declining, a
college alienated, and a church profaned and hastening to the ground.

St. Andrews indeed has formerly suffered more atrocious ravages and more
extensive destruction, but recent evils affect with greater force.  We
were reconciled to the sight of archiepiscopal ruins.  The distance of a
calamity from the present time seems to preclude the mind from contact or
sympathy.  Events long past are barely known; they are not considered.  We
read with as little emotion the violence of Knox and his followers, as
the irruptions of Alaric and the Goths.  Had the university been
destroyed two centuries ago, we should not have regretted it; but to see
it pining in decay and struggling for life, fills the mind with mournful
images and ineffectual wishes.




ABERBROTHICK


As we knew sorrow and wishes to be vain, it was now our business to mind
our way.  The roads of Scotland afford little diversion to the traveller,
who seldom sees himself either encountered or overtaken, and who has
nothing to contemplate but grounds that have no visible boundaries, or
are separated by walls of loose stone.  From the bank of the Tweed to St.
Andrews I had never seen a single tree, which I did not believe to have
grown up far within the present century.  Now and then about a
gentleman's house stands a small plantation, which in Scotch is called a
policy, but of these there are few, and those few all very young.  The
variety of sun and shade is here utterly unknown.  There is no tree for
either shelter or timber.  The oak and the thorn is equally a stranger,
and the whole country is extended in uniform nakedness, except that in
the road between Kirkaldy and Cowpar, I passed for a few yards between
two hedges.  A tree might be a show in Scotland as a horse in Venice.  At
St. Andrews Mr. Boswell found only one, and recommended it to my notice;
I told him that it was rough and low, or looked as if I thought so.  This,
said he, is nothing to another a few miles off.  I was still less
delighted to hear that another tree was not to be seen nearer.  Nay, said
a gentleman that stood by, I know but of this and that tree in the
county.

The Lowlands of Scotland had once undoubtedly an equal portion of woods
with other countries.  Forests are every where gradually diminished, as
architecture and cultivation prevail by the increase of people and the
introduction of arts.  But I believe few regions have been denuded like
this, where many centuries must have passed in waste without the least
thought of future supply.  Davies observes in his account of Ireland,
that no Irishman had ever planted an orchard.  For that negligence some
excuse might be drawn from an unsettled state of life, and the
instability of property; but in Scotland possession has long been secure,
and inheritance regular, yet it may be doubted whether before the Union
any man between Edinburgh and England had ever set a tree.

Of this improvidence no other account can be given than that it probably
began in times of tumult, and continued because it had begun.  Established
custom is not easily broken, till some great event shakes the whole
system of things, and life seems to recommence upon new principles.  That
before the Union the Scots had little trade and little money, is no valid
apology; for plantation is the least expensive of all methods of
improvement.  To drop a seed into the ground can cost nothing, and the
trouble is not great of protecting the young plant, till it is out of
danger; though it must be allowed to have some difficulty in places like
these, where they have neither wood for palisades, nor thorns for hedges.

Our way was over the Firth of Tay, where, though the water was not wide,
we paid four shillings for ferrying the chaise.  In Scotland the
necessaries of life are easily procured, but superfluities and elegancies
are of the same price at least as in England, and therefore may be
considered as much dearer.

We stopped a while at Dundee, where I remember nothing remarkable, and
mounting our chaise again, came about the close of the day to
Aberbrothick.

The monastery of Aberbrothick is of great renown in the history of
Scotland.  Its ruins afford ample testimony of its ancient magnificence:
Its extent might, I suppose, easily be found by following the walls among
the grass and weeds, and its height is known by some parts yet standing.
The arch of one of the gates is entire, and of another only so far
dilapidated as to diversify the appearance.  A square apartment of great
loftiness is yet standing; its use I could not conjecture, as its
elevation was very disproportionate to its area.  Two corner towers,
particularly attracted our attention.  Mr. Boswell, whose inquisitiveness
is seconded by great activity, scrambled in at a high window, but found
the stairs within broken, and could not reach the top.  Of the other
tower we were told that the inhabitants sometimes climbed it, but we did
not immediately discern the entrance, and as the night was gathering upon
us, thought proper to desist.  Men skilled in architecture might do what
we did not attempt: They might probably form an exact ground-plot of this
venerable edifice.  They may from some parts yet standing conjecture its
general form, and perhaps by comparing it with other buildings of the
same kind and the same age, attain an idea very near to truth.  I should
scarcely have regretted my journey, had it afforded nothing more than the
sight of Aberbrothick.




MONTROSE


Leaving these fragments of magnificence, we travelled on to Montrose,
which we surveyed in the morning, and found it well built, airy, and
clean.  The townhouse is a handsome fabrick with a portico.  We then went
to view the English chapel, and found a small church, clean to a degree
unknown in any other part of Scotland, with commodious galleries, and
what was yet less expected, with an organ.

At our inn we did not find a reception such as we thought proportionate
to the commercial opulence of the place; but Mr. Boswell desired me to
observe that the innkeeper was an Englishman, and I then defended him as
well as I could.

When I had proceeded thus far, I had opportunities of observing what I
had never heard, that there are many beggars in Scotland.  In Edinburgh
the proportion is, I think, not less than in London, and in the smaller
places it is far greater than in English towns of the same extent.  It
must, however, be allowed that they are not importunate, nor clamorous.
They solicit silently, or very modestly, and therefore though their
behaviour may strike with more force the heart of a stranger, they are
certainly in danger of missing the attention of their countrymen.  Novelty
has always some power, an unaccustomed mode of begging excites an
unaccustomed degree of pity.  But the force of novelty is by its own
nature soon at an end; the efficacy of outcry and perseverance is
permanent and certain.

The road from Montrose exhibited a continuation of the same appearances.
The country is still naked, the hedges are of stone, and the fields so
generally plowed that it is hard to imagine where grass is found for the
horses that till them.  The harvest, which was almost ripe, appeared very
plentiful.

Early in the afternoon Mr. Boswell observed that we were at no great
distance from the house of lord Monboddo.  The magnetism of his
conversation easily drew us out of our way, and the entertainment which
we received would have been a sufficient recompense for a much greater
deviation.

The roads beyond Edinburgh, as they are less frequented, must be expected
to grow gradually rougher; but they were hitherto by no means
incommodious.  We travelled on with the gentle pace of a Scotch driver,
who having no rivals in expedition, neither gives himself nor his horses
unnecessary trouble.  We did not affect the impatience we did not feel,
but were satisfied with the company of each other as well riding in the
chaise, as sitting at an inn.  The night and the day are equally solitary
and equally safe; for where there are so few travellers, why should there
be robbers.




ABERDEEN


We came somewhat late to Aberdeen, and found the inn so full, that we had
some difficulty in obtaining admission, till Mr. Boswell made himself
known: His name overpowered all objection, and we found a very good house
and civil treatment.

I received the next day a very kind letter from Sir Alexander Gordon,
whom I had formerly known in London, and after a cessation of all
intercourse for near twenty years met here professor of physic in the
King's College.  Such unexpected renewals of acquaintance may be numbered
among the most pleasing incidents of life.

The knowledge of one professor soon procured me the notice of the rest,
and I did not want any token of regard, being conducted wherever there
was any thing which I desired to see, and entertained at once with the
novelty of the place, and the kindness of communication.

To write of the cities of our own island with the solemnity of
geographical description, as if we had been cast upon a newly discovered
coast, has the appearance of very frivolous ostentation; yet as Scotland
is little known to the greater part of those who may read these
observations, it is not superfluous to relate, that under the name of
Aberdeen are comprised two towns standing about a mile distant from each
other, but governed, I think, by the same magistrates.

Old Aberdeen is the ancient episcopal city, in which are still to be seen
the remains of the cathedral.  It has the appearance of a town in decay,
having been situated in times when commerce was yet unstudied, with very
little attention to the commodities of the harbour.

New Aberdeen has all the bustle of prosperous trade, and all the shew of
increasing opulence.  It is built by the water-side.  The houses are
large and lofty, and the streets spacious and clean.  They build almost
wholly with the granite used in the new pavement of the streets of
London, which is well known not to want hardness, yet they shape it
easily.  It is beautiful and must be very lasting.

What particular parts of commerce are chiefly exercised by the merchants
of Aberdeen, I have not inquired.  The manufacture which forces itself
upon a stranger's eye is that of knit-stockings, on which the women of
the lower class are visibly employed.

In each of these towns there is a college, or in stricter language, an
university; for in both there are professors of the same parts of
learning, and the colleges hold their sessions and confer degrees
separately, with total independence of one on the other.

In old Aberdeen stands the King's College, of which the first president
was Hector Boece, or Boethius, who may be justly reverenced as one of the
revivers of elegant learning.  When he studied at Paris, he was
acquainted with Erasmus, who afterwards gave him a public testimony of
his esteem, by inscribing to him a catalogue of his works.  The stile of
Boethius, though, perhaps, not always rigorously pure, is formed with
great diligence upon ancient models, and wholly uninfected with monastic
barbarity.  His history is written with elegance and vigour, but his
fabulousness and credulity are justly blamed.  His fabulousness, if he
was the author of the fictions, is a fault for which no apology can be
made; but his credulity may be excused in an age, when all men were
credulous.  Learning was then rising on the world; but ages so long
accustomed to darkness, were too much dazzled with its light to see any
thing distinctly.  The first race of scholars, in the fifteenth century,
and some time after, were, for the most part, learning to speak, rather
than to think, and were therefore more studious of elegance than of
truth.  The contemporaries of Boethius thought it sufficient to know what
the ancients had delivered.  The examination of tenets and of facts was
reserved for another generation.

* * * * *

Boethius, as president of the university, enjoyed a revenue of forty
Scottish marks, about two pounds four shillings and sixpence of sterling
money.  In the present age of trade and taxes, it is difficult even for
the imagination so to raise the value of money, or so to diminish the
demands of life, as to suppose four and forty shillings a year, an
honourable stipend; yet it was probably equal, not only to the needs, but
to the rank of Boethius.  The wealth of England was undoubtedly to that
of Scotland more than five to one, and it is known that Henry the eighth,
among whose faults avarice was never reckoned, granted to Roger Ascham,
as a reward of his learning, a pension of ten pounds a year.

The other, called the Marischal College, is in the new town.  The hall is
large and well lighted.  One of its ornaments is the picture of Arthur
Johnston, who was principal of the college, and who holds among the Latin
poets of Scotland the next place to the elegant Buchanan.

In the library I was shewn some curiosities; a Hebrew manuscript of
exquisite penmanship, and a Latin translation of Aristotle's Politicks by
Leonardus Aretinus, written in the Roman character with nicety and
beauty, which, as the art of printing has made them no longer necessary,
are not now to be found.  This was one of the latest performances of the
transcribers, for Aretinus died but about twenty years before typography
was invented.  This version has been printed, and may be found in
libraries, but is little read; for the same books have been since
translated both by Victorius and Lambinus, who lived in an age more
cultivated, but perhaps owed in part to Aretinus that they were able to
excel him.  Much is due to those who first broke the way to knowledge,
and left only to their successors the task of smoothing it.

In both these colleges the methods of instruction are nearly the same;
the lectures differing only by the accidental difference of diligence, or
ability in the professors.  The students wear scarlet gowns and the
professors black, which is, I believe, the academical dress in all the
Scottish universities, except that of Edinburgh, where the scholars are
not distinguished by any particular habit.  In the King's College there
is kept a public table, but the scholars of the Marischal College are
boarded in the town.  The expence of living is here, according to the
information that I could obtain, somewhat more than at St. Andrews.

The course of education is extended to four years, at the end of which
those who take a degree, who are not many, become masters of arts, and
whoever is a master may, if he pleases, immediately commence doctor.  The
title of doctor, however, was for a considerable time bestowed only on
physicians.  The advocates are examined and approved by their own body;
the ministers were not ambitious of titles, or were afraid of being
censured for ambition; and the doctorate in every faculty was commonly
given or sold into other countries.  The ministers are now reconciled to
distinction, and as it must always happen that some will excel others,
have thought graduation a proper testimony of uncommon abilities or
acquisitions.

The indiscriminate collation of degrees has justly taken away that
respect which they originally claimed as stamps, by which the literary
value of men so distinguished was authoritatively denoted.  That
academical honours, or any others should be conferred with exact
proportion to merit, is more than human judgment or human integrity have
given reason to expect.  Perhaps degrees in universities cannot be better
adjusted by any general rule than by the length of time passed in the
public profession of learning.  An English or Irish doctorate cannot be
obtained by a very young man, and it is reasonable to suppose, what is
likewise by experience commonly found true, that he who is by age
qualified to be a doctor, has in so much time gained learning sufficient
not to disgrace the title, or wit sufficient not to desire it.

The Scotch universities hold but one term or session in the year.  That
of St. Andrews continues eight months, that of Aberdeen only five, from
the first of November to the first of April.

In Aberdeen there is an English Chapel, in which the congregation was
numerous and splendid.  The form of public worship used by the church of
England is in Scotland legally practised in licensed chapels served by
clergymen of English or Irish ordination, and by tacit connivance quietly
permitted in separate congregations supplied with ministers by the
successors of the bishops who were deprived at the Revolution.

We came to Aberdeen on Saturday August 21.  On Monday we were invited
into the town-hall, where I had the freedom of the city given me by the
Lord Provost.  The honour conferred had all the decorations that
politeness could add, and what I am afraid I should not have had to say
of any city south of the Tweed, I found no petty officer bowing for a
fee.

The parchment containing the record of admission is, with the seal
appending, fastened to a riband and worn for one day by the new citizen
in his hat.

By a lady who saw us at the chapel, the Earl of Errol was informed of our
arrival, and we had the honour of an invitation to his seat, called
Slanes Castle, as I am told, improperly, from the castle of that name,
which once stood at a place not far distant.

The road beyond Aberdeen grew more stony, and continued equally naked of
all vegetable decoration.  We travelled over a tract of ground near the
sea, which, not long ago, suffered a very uncommon, and unexpected
calamity.  The sand of the shore was raised by a tempest in such
quantities, and carried to such a distance, that an estate was
overwhelmed and lost.  Such and so hopeless was the barrenness
superinduced, that the owner, when he was required to pay the usual tax,
desired rather to resign the ground.




SLANES CASTLE, THE BULLER OF BUCHAN


We came in the afternoon to Slanes Castle, built upon the margin of the
sea, so that the walls of one of the towers seem only a continuation of a
perpendicular rock, the foot of which is beaten by the waves.  To walk
round the house seemed impracticable.  From the windows the eye wanders
over the sea that separates Scotland from Norway, and when the winds beat
with violence must enjoy all the terrifick grandeur of the tempestuous
ocean.  I would not for my amusement wish for a storm; but as storms,
whether wished or not, will sometimes happen, I may say, without
violation of humanity, that I should willingly look out upon them from
Slanes Castle.

When we were about to take our leave, our departure was prohibited by the
countess till we should have seen two places upon the coast, which she
rightly considered as worthy of curiosity, Dun Buy, and the Buller of
Buchan, to which Mr. Boyd very kindly conducted us.

Dun Buy, which in Erse is said to signify the Yellow Rock, is a double
protuberance of stone, open to the main sea on one side, and parted from
the land by a very narrow channel on the other.  It has its name and its
colour from the dung of innumerable sea-fowls, which in the Spring chuse
this place as convenient for incubation, and have their eggs and their
young taken in great abundance.  One of the birds that frequent this rock
has, as we were told, its body not larger than a duck's, and yet lays
eggs as large as those of a goose.  This bird is by the inhabitants named
a Coot.  That which is called Coot in England, is here a Cooter.

Upon these rocks there was nothing that could long detain attention, and
we soon turned our eyes to the Buller, or Bouilloir of Buchan, which no
man can see with indifference, who has either sense of danger or delight
in rarity.  It is a rock perpendicularly tubulated, united on one side
with a high shore, and on the other rising steep to a great height, above
the main sea.  The top is open, from which may be seen a dark gulf of
water which flows into the cavity, through a breach made in the lower
part of the inclosing rock.  It has the appearance of a vast well
bordered with a wall.  The edge of the Buller is not wide, and to those
that walk round, appears very narrow.  He that ventures to look downward
sees, that if his foot should slip, he must fall from his dreadful
elevation upon stones on one side, or into water on the other.  We
however went round, and were glad when the circuit was completed.

When we came down to the sea, we saw some boats, and rowers, and resolved
to explore the Buller at the bottom.  We entered the arch, which the
water had made, and found ourselves in a place, which, though we could
not think ourselves in danger, we could scarcely survey without some
recoil of the mind.  The bason in which we floated was nearly circular,
perhaps thirty yards in diameter.  We were inclosed by a natural wall,
rising steep on every side to a height which produced the idea of
insurmountable confinement.  The interception of all lateral light caused
a dismal gloom.  Round us was a perpendicular rock, above us the distant
sky, and below an unknown profundity of water.  If I had any malice
against a walking spirit, instead of laying him in the Red-sea, I would
condemn him to reside in the Buller of Buchan.

But terrour without danger is only one of the sports of fancy, a
voluntary agitation of the mind that is permitted no longer than it
pleases.  We were soon at leisure to examine the place with minute
inspection, and found many cavities which, as the waterman told us, went
backward to a depth which they had never explored.  Their extent we had
not time to try; they are said to serve different purposes.  Ladies come
hither sometimes in the summer with collations, and smugglers make them
storehouses for clandestine merchandise.  It is hardly to be doubted but
the pirates of ancient times often used them as magazines of arms, or
repositories of plunder.

To the little vessels used by the northern rovers, the Buller may have
served as a shelter from storms, and perhaps as a retreat from enemies;
the entrance might have been stopped, or guarded with little difficulty,
and though the vessels that were stationed within would have been
battered with stones showered on them from above, yet the crews would
have lain safe in the caverns.

Next morning we continued our journey, pleased with our reception at
Slanes Castle, of which we had now leisure to recount the grandeur and
the elegance; for our way afforded us few topics of conversation.  The
ground was neither uncultivated nor unfruitful; but it was still all
arable.  Of flocks or herds there was no appearance.  I had now travelled
two hundred miles in Scotland, and seen only one tree not younger than
myself.




BAMFF


We dined this day at the house of Mr. Frazer of Streichton, who shewed us
in his grounds some stones yet standing of a druidical circle, and what I
began to think more worthy of notice, some forest trees of full growth.

At night we came to Bamff, where I remember nothing that particularly
claimed my attention.  The ancient towns of Scotland have generally an
appearance unusual to Englishmen.  The houses, whether great or small,
are for the most part built of stones.  Their ends are now and then next
the streets, and the entrance into them is very often by a flight of
steps, which reaches up to the second story, the floor which is level
with the ground being entered only by stairs descending within the house.

The art of joining squares of glass with lead is little used in Scotland,
and in some places is totally forgotten.  The frames of their windows are
all of wood.  They are more frugal of their glass than the English, and
will often, in houses not otherwise mean, compose a square of two pieces,
not joining like cracked glass, but with one edge laid perhaps half an
inch over the other.  Their windows do not move upon hinges, but are
pushed up and drawn down in grooves, yet they are seldom accommodated
with weights and pullies.  He that would have his window open must hold
it with his hand, unless what may be sometimes found among good
contrivers, there be a nail which he may stick into a hole, to keep it
from falling.

What cannot be done without some uncommon trouble or particular
expedient, will not often be done at all.  The incommodiousness of the
Scotch windows keeps them very closely shut.  The necessity of
ventilating human habitations has not yet been found by our northern
neighbours; and even in houses well built and elegantly furnished, a
stranger may be sometimes forgiven, if he allows himself to wish for
fresher air.

These diminutive observations seem to take away something from the
dignity of writing, and therefore are never communicated but with
hesitation, and a little fear of abasement and contempt.  But it must be
remembered, that life consists not of a series of illustrious actions, or
elegant enjoyments; the greater part of our time passes in compliance
with necessities, in the performance of daily duties, in the removal of
small inconveniences, in the procurement of petty pleasures; and we are
well or ill at ease, as the main stream of life glides on smoothly, or is
ruffled by small obstacles and frequent interruption.  The true state of
every nation is the state of common life.  The manners of a people are
not to be found in the schools of learning, or the palaces of greatness,
where the national character is obscured or obliterated by travel or
instruction, by philosophy or vanity; nor is public happiness to be
estimated by the assemblies of the gay, or the banquets of the rich.  The
great mass of nations is neither rich nor gay: they whose aggregate
constitutes the people, are found in the streets, and the villages, in
the shops and farms; and from them collectively considered, must the
measure of general prosperity be taken.  As they approach to delicacy a
nation is refined, as their conveniences are multiplied, a nation, at
least a commercial nation, must be denominated wealthy.




ELGIN


Finding nothing to detain us at Bamff, we set out in the morning, and
having breakfasted at Cullen, about noon came to Elgin, where in the inn,
that we supposed the best, a dinner was set before us, which we could not
eat.  This was the first time, and except one, the last, that I found any
reason to complain of a Scotish table; and such disappointments, I
suppose, must be expected in every country, where there is no great
frequency of travellers.

The ruins of the cathedral of Elgin afforded us another proof of the
waste of reformation.  There is enough yet remaining to shew, that it was
once magnificent.  Its whole plot is easily traced.  On the north side of
the choir, the chapter-house, which is roofed with an arch of stone,
remains entire; and on the south side, another mass of building, which we
could not enter, is preserved by the care of the family of Gordon; but
the body of the church is a mass of fragments.

A paper was here put into our hands, which deduced from sufficient
authorities the history of this venerable ruin.  The church of Elgin had,
in the intestine tumults of the barbarous ages, been laid waste by the
irruption of a highland chief, whom the bishop had offended; but it was
gradually restored to the state, of which the traces may be now
discerned, and was at last not destroyed by the tumultuous violence of
Knox, but more shamefully suffered to dilapidate by deliberate robbery
and frigid indifference.  There is still extant, in the books of the
council, an order, of which I cannot remember the date, but which was
doubtless issued after the Reformation, directing that the lead, which
covers the two cathedrals of Elgin and Aberdeen, shall be taken away, and
converted into money for the support of the army.  A Scotch army was in
those times very cheaply kept; yet the lead of two churches must have
born so small a proportion to any military expence, that it is hard not
to believe the reason alleged to be merely popular, and the money
intended for some private purse.  The order however was obeyed; the two
churches were stripped, and the lead was shipped to be sold in Holland.  I
hope every reader will rejoice that this cargo of sacrilege was lost at
sea.

Let us not however make too much haste to despise our neighbours.  Our
own cathedrals are mouldering by unregarded dilapidation.  It seems to be
part of the despicable philosophy of the time to despise monuments of
sacred magnificence, and we are in danger of doing that deliberately,
which the Scots did not do but in the unsettled state of an imperfect
constitution.

Those who had once uncovered the cathedrals never wished to cover them
again; and being thus made useless, they were, first neglected, and
perhaps, as the stone was wanted, afterwards demolished.

Elgin seems a place of little trade, and thinly inhabited.  The episcopal
cities of Scotland, I believe, generally fell with their churches, though
some of them have since recovered by a situation convenient for commerce.
Thus Glasgow, though it has no longer an archbishop, has risen beyond its
original state by the opulence of its traders; and Aberdeen, though its
ancient stock had decayed, flourishes by a new shoot in another place.

In the chief street of Elgin, the houses jut over the lowest story, like
the old buildings of timber in London, but with greater prominence; so
that there is sometimes a walk for a considerable length under a
cloister, or portico, which is now indeed frequently broken, because the
new houses have another form, but seems to have been uniformly continued
in the old city.




FORES.  CALDER.  FORT GEORGE


We went forwards the same day to Fores, the town to which Macbeth was
travelling, when he met the weird sisters in his way.  This to an
Englishman is classic ground.  Our imaginations were heated, and our
thoughts recalled to their old amusements.

We had now a prelude to the Highlands.  We began to leave fertility and
culture behind us, and saw for a great length of road nothing but heath;
yet at Fochabars, a seat belonging to the duke of Gordon, there is an
orchard, which in Scotland I had never seen before, with some timber
trees, and a plantation of oaks.

At Fores we found good accommodation, but nothing worthy of particular
remark, and next morning entered upon the road, on which Macbeth heard
the fatal prediction; but we travelled on not interrupted by promises of
kingdoms, and came to Nairn, a royal burgh, which, if once it flourished,
is now in a state of miserable decay; but I know not whether its chief
annual magistrate has not still the title of Lord Provost.

At Nairn we may fix the verge of the Highlands; for here I first saw peat
fires, and first heard the Erse language.  We had no motive to stay
longer than to breakfast, and went forward to the house of Mr. Macaulay,
the minister who published an account of St. Kilda, and by his direction
visited Calder Castle, from which Macbeth drew his second title.  It has
been formerly a place of strength.  The drawbridge is still to be seen,
but the moat is now dry.  The tower is very ancient: Its walls are of
great thickness, arched on the top with stone, and surrounded with
battlements.  The rest of the house is later, though far from modern.

We were favoured by a gentleman, who lives in the castle, with a letter
to one of the officers at Fort George, which being the most regular
fortification in the island, well deserves the notice of a traveller, who
has never travelled before.  We went thither next day, found a very kind
reception, were led round the works by a gentleman, who explained the use
of every part, and entertained by Sir Eyre Coote, the governour, with
such elegance of conversation as left us no attention to the delicacies
of his table.

Of Fort George I shall not attempt to give any account.  I cannot
delineate it scientifically, and a loose and popular description is of
use only when the imagination is to be amused.  There was every where an
appearance of the utmost neatness and regularity.  But my suffrage is of
little value, because this and Fort Augustus are the only garrisons that
I ever saw.

We did not regret the time spent at the fort, though in consequence of
our delay we came somewhat late to Inverness, the town which may properly
be called the capital of the Highlands.  Hither the inhabitants of the
inland parts come to be supplied with what they cannot make for
themselves: Hither the young nymphs of the mountains and valleys are sent
for education, and as far as my observation has reached, are not sent in
vain.




INVERNESS


Inverness was the last place which had a regular communication by high
roads with the southern counties.  All the ways beyond it have, I
believe, been made by the soldiers in this century.  At Inverness
therefore Cromwell, when he subdued Scotland, stationed a garrison, as at
the boundary of the Highlands.  The soldiers seem to have incorporated
afterwards with the inhabitants, and to have peopled the place with an
English race; for the language of this town has been long considered as
peculiarly elegant.

Here is a castle, called the castle of Macbeth, the walls of which are
yet standing.  It was no very capacious edifice, but stands upon a rock
so high and steep, that I think it was once not accessible, but by the
help of ladders, or a bridge.  Over against it, on another hill, was a
fort built by Cromwell, now totally demolished; for no faction of
Scotland loved the name of Cromwell, or had any desire to continue his
memory.

Yet what the Romans did to other nations, was in a great degree done by
Cromwell to the Scots; he civilized them by conquest, and introduced by
useful violence the arts of peace.  I was told at Aberdeen that the
people learned from Cromwell's soldiers to make shoes and to plant kail.

How they lived without kail, it is not easy to guess: They cultivate
hardly any other plant for common tables, and when they had not kail they
probably had nothing.  The numbers that go barefoot are still sufficient
to shew that shoes may be spared: They are not yet considered as
necessaries of life; for tall boys, not otherwise meanly dressed, run
without them in the streets; and in the islands the sons of gentlemen
pass several of their first years with naked feet.

I know not whether it be not peculiar to the Scots to have attained the
liberal, without the manual arts, to have excelled in ornamental
knowledge, and to have wanted not only the elegancies, but the
conveniences of common life.  Literature soon after its revival found its
way to Scotland, and from the middle of the sixteenth century, almost to
the middle of the seventeenth, the politer studies were very diligently
pursued.  The Latin poetry of _Deliciae Poetarum Scotorum_ would have
done honour to any nation, at least till the publication of _May's
Supplement_ the English had very little to oppose.

Yet men thus ingenious and inquisitive were content to live in total
ignorance of the trades by which human wants are supplied, and to supply
them by the grossest means.  Till the Union made them acquainted with
English manners, the culture of their lands was unskilful, and their
domestick life unformed; their tables were coarse as the feasts of
Eskimeaux, and their houses filthy as the cottages of Hottentots.

Since they have known that their condition was capable of improvement,
their progress in useful knowledge has been rapid and uniform.  What
remains to be done they will quickly do, and then wonder, like me, why
that which was so necessary and so easy was so long delayed.  But they
must be for ever content to owe to the English that elegance and culture,
which, if they had been vigilant and active, perhaps the English might
have owed to them.

Here the appearance of life began to alter.  I had seen a few women with
plaids at Aberdeen; but at Inverness the Highland manners are common.
There is I think a kirk, in which only the Erse language is used.  There
is likewise an English chapel, but meanly built, where on Sunday we saw a
very decent congregation.

We were now to bid farewel to the luxury of travelling, and to enter a
country upon which perhaps no wheel has ever rolled.  We could indeed
have used our post-chaise one day longer, along the military road to Fort
Augustus, but we could have hired no horses beyond Inverness, and we were
not so sparing of ourselves, as to lead them, merely that we might have
one day longer the indulgence of a carriage.

At Inverness therefore we procured three horses for ourselves and a
servant, and one more for our baggage, which was no very heavy load.  We
found in the course of our journey the convenience of having
disencumbered ourselves, by laying aside whatever we could spare; for it
is not to be imagined without experience, how in climbing crags, and
treading bogs, and winding through narrow and obstructed passages, a
little bulk will hinder, and a little weight will burthen; or how often a
man that has pleased himself at home with his own resolution, will, in
the hour of darkness and fatigue, be content to leave behind him every
thing but himself.




LOUGH NESS


We took two Highlanders to run beside us, partly to shew us the way, and
partly to take back from the sea-side the horses, of which they were the
owners.  One of them was a man of great liveliness and activity, of whom
his companion said, that he would tire any horse in Inverness.  Both of
them were civil and ready-handed.  Civility seems part of the national
character of Highlanders.  Every chieftain is a monarch, and politeness,
the natural product of royal government, is diffused from the laird
through the whole clan.  But they are not commonly dexterous: their
narrowness of life confines them to a few operations, and they are
accustomed to endure little wants more than to remove them.

We mounted our steeds on the thirtieth of August, and directed our guides
to conduct us to Fort Augustus.  It is built at the head of Lough Ness,
of which Inverness stands at the outlet.  The way between them has been
cut by the soldiers, and the greater part of it runs along a rock,
levelled with great labour and exactness, near the water-side.

Most of this day's journey was very pleasant.  The day, though bright,
was not hot; and the appearance of the country, if I had not seen the
Peak, would have been wholly new.  We went upon a surface so hard and
level, that we had little care to hold the bridle, and were therefore at
full leisure for contemplation.  On the left were high and steep rocks
shaded with birch, the hardy native of the North, and covered with fern
or heath.  On the right the limpid waters of Lough Ness were beating
their bank, and waving their surface by a gentle agitation.  Beyond them
were rocks sometimes covered with verdure, and sometimes towering in
horrid nakedness.  Now and then we espied a little cornfield, which
served to impress more strongly the general barrenness.

Lough Ness is about twenty-four miles long, and from one mile to two
miles broad.  It is remarkable that Boethius, in his description of
Scotland, gives it twelve miles of breadth.  When historians or
geographers exhibit false accounts of places far distant, they may be
forgiven, because they can tell but what they are told; and that their
accounts exceed the truth may be justly supposed, because most men
exaggerate to others, if not to themselves: but Boethius lived at no
great distance; if he never saw the lake, he must have been very
incurious, and if he had seen it, his veracity yielded to very slight
temptations.

Lough Ness, though not twelve miles broad, is a very remarkable diffusion
of water without islands.  It fills a large hollow between two ridges of
high rocks, being supplied partly by the torrents which fall into it on
either side, and partly, as is supposed, by springs at the bottom.  Its
water is remarkably clear and pleasant, and is imagined by the natives to
be medicinal.  We were told, that it is in some places a hundred and
forty fathoms deep, a profundity scarcely credible, and which probably
those that relate it have never sounded.  Its fish are salmon, trout, and
pike.

It was said at fort Augustus, that Lough Ness is open in the hardest
winters, though a lake not far from it is covered with ice.  In
discussing these exceptions from the course of nature, the first question
is, whether the fact be justly stated.  That which is strange is
delightful, and a pleasing error is not willingly detected.  Accuracy of
narration is not very common, and there are few so rigidly philosophical,
as not to represent as perpetual, what is only frequent, or as constant,
what is really casual.  If it be true that Lough Ness never freezes, it
is either sheltered by its high banks from the cold blasts, and exposed
only to those winds which have more power to agitate than congeal; or it
is kept in perpetual motion by the rush of streams from the rocks that
inclose it.  Its profundity though it should be such as is represented
can have little part in this exemption; for though deep wells are not
frozen, because their water is secluded from the external air, yet where
a wide surface is exposed to the full influence of a freezing atmosphere,
I know not why the depth should keep it open.  Natural philosophy is now
one of the favourite studies of the Scottish nation, and Lough Ness well
deserves to be diligently examined.

The road on which we travelled, and which was itself a source of
entertainment, is made along the rock, in the direction of the lough,
sometimes by breaking off protuberances, and sometimes by cutting the
great mass of stone to a considerable depth.  The fragments are piled in
a loose wall on either side, with apertures left at very short spaces, to
give a passage to the wintry currents.  Part of it is bordered with low
trees, from which our guides gathered nuts, and would have had the
appearance of an English lane, except that an English lane is almost
always dirty.  It has been made with great labour, but has this
advantage, that it cannot, without equal labour, be broken up.

Within our sight there were goats feeding or playing.  The mountains have
red deer, but they came not within view; and if what is said of their
vigilance and subtlety be true, they have some claim to that palm of
wisdom, which the eastern philosopher, whom Alexander interrogated, gave
to those beasts which live furthest from men.

Near the way, by the water side, we espied a cottage.  This was the first
Highland Hut that I had seen; and as our business was with life and
manners, we were willing to visit it.  To enter a habitation without
leave, seems to be not considered here as rudeness or intrusion.  The old
laws of hospitality still give this licence to a stranger.

A hut is constructed with loose stones, ranged for the most part with
some tendency to circularity.  It must be placed where the wind cannot
act upon it with violence, because it has no cement; and where the water
will run easily away, because it has no floor but the naked ground.  The
wall, which is commonly about six feet high, declines from the
perpendicular a little inward.  Such rafters as can be procured are then
raised for a roof, and covered with heath, which makes a strong and warm
thatch, kept from flying off by ropes of twisted heath, of which the
ends, reaching from the center of the thatch to the top of the wall, are
held firm by the weight of a large stone.  No light is admitted but at
the entrance, and through a hole in the thatch, which gives vent to the
smoke.  This hole is not directly over the fire, lest the rain should
extinguish it; and the smoke therefore naturally fills the place before
it escapes.  Such is the general structure of the houses in which one of
the nations of this opulent and powerful island has been hitherto content
to live.  Huts however are not more uniform than palaces; and this which
we were inspecting was very far from one of the meanest, for it was
divided into several apartments; and its inhabitants possessed such
property as a pastoral poet might exalt into riches.

When we entered, we found an old woman boiling goats-flesh in a kettle.
She spoke little English, but we had interpreters at hand; and she was
willing enough to display her whole system of economy.  She has five
children, of which none are yet gone from her.  The eldest, a boy of
thirteen, and her husband, who is eighty years old, were at work in the
wood.  Her two next sons were gone to Inverness to buy meal, by which
oatmeal is always meant.  Meal she considered as expensive food, and told
us, that in Spring, when the goats gave milk, the children could live
without it.  She is mistress of sixty goats, and I saw many kids in an
enclosure at the end of her house.  She had also some poultry.  By the
lake we saw a potatoe-garden, and a small spot of ground on which stood
four shucks, containing each twelve sheaves of barley.  She has all this
from the labour of their own hands, and for what is necessary to be
bought, her kids and her chickens are sent to market.

With the true pastoral hospitality, she asked us to sit down and drink
whisky.  She is religious, and though the kirk is four miles off,
probably eight English miles, she goes thither every Sunday.  We gave her
a shilling, and she begged snuff; for snuff is the luxury of a Highland
cottage.

Soon afterwards we came to the General's Hut, so called because it was
the temporary abode of Wade, while he superintended the works upon the
road.  It is now a house of entertainment for passengers, and we found it
not ill stocked with provisions.




FALL OF FIERS


Towards evening we crossed, by a bridge, the river which makes the
celebrated fall of Fiers.  The country at the bridge strikes the
imagination with all the gloom and grandeur of Siberian solitude.  The
way makes a flexure, and the mountains, covered with trees, rise at once
on the left hand and in the front.  We desired our guides to shew us the
fall, and dismounting, clambered over very rugged crags, till I began to
wish that our curiosity might have been gratified with less trouble and
danger.  We came at last to a place where we could overlook the river,
and saw a channel torn, as it seems, through black piles of stone, by
which the stream is obstructed and broken, till it comes to a very steep
descent, of such dreadful depth, that we were naturally inclined to turn
aside our eyes.

But we visited the place at an unseasonable time, and found it divested
of its dignity and terror.  Nature never gives every thing at once.  A
long continuance of dry weather, which made the rest of the way easy and
delightful, deprived us of the pleasure expected from the fall of Fiers.
The river having now no water but what the springs supply, showed us only
a swift current, clear and shallow, fretting over the asperities of the
rocky bottom, and we were left to exercise our thoughts, by endeavouring
to conceive the effect of a thousand streams poured from the mountains
into one channel, struggling for expansion in a narrow passage,
exasperated by rocks rising in their way, and at last discharging all
their violence of waters by a sudden fall through the horrid chasm.

The way now grew less easy, descending by an uneven declivity, but
without either dirt or danger.  We did not arrive at Fort Augustus till
it was late.  Mr. Boswell, who, between his father's merit and his own,
is sure of reception wherever he comes, sent a servant before to beg
admission and entertainment for that night.  Mr. Trapaud, the governor,
treated us with that courtesy which is so closely connected with the
military character.  He came out to meet us beyond the gates, and
apologized that, at so late an hour, the rules of a garrison suffered him
to give us entrance only at the postern.




FORT AUGUSTUS


In the morning we viewed the fort, which is much less than that of St.
George, and is said to be commanded by the neighbouring hills.  It was
not long ago taken by the Highlanders.  But its situation seems well
chosen for pleasure, if not for strength; it stands at the head of the
lake, and, by a sloop of sixty tuns, is supplied from Inverness with
great convenience.

We were now to cross the Highlands towards the western coast, and to
content ourselves with such accommodations, as a way so little frequented
could afford.  The journey was not formidable, for it was but of two
days, very unequally divided, because the only house, where we could be
entertained, was not further off than a third of the way.  We soon came
to a high hill, which we mounted by a military road, cut in traverses, so
that as we went upon a higher stage, we saw the baggage following us
below in a contrary direction.  To make this way, the rock has been hewn
to a level with labour that might have broken the perseverance of a Roman
legion.

The country is totally denuded of its wood, but the stumps both of oaks
and firs, which are still found, shew that it has been once a forest of
large timber.  I do not remember that we saw any animals, but we were
told that, in the mountains, there are stags, roebucks, goats and
rabbits.

We did not perceive that this tract was possessed by human beings, except
that once we saw a corn field, in which a lady was walking with some
gentlemen.  Their house was certainly at no great distance, but so
situated that we could not descry it.

Passing on through the dreariness of solitude, we found a party of
soldiers from the fort, working on the road, under the superintendence of
a serjeant.  We told them how kindly we had been treated at the garrison,
and as we were enjoying the benefit of their labours, begged leave to
shew our gratitude by a small present.




ANOCH


Early in the afternoon we came to Anoch, a village in Glenmollison of
three huts, one of which is distinguished by a chimney.  Here we were to
dine and lodge, and were conducted through the first room, that had the
chimney, into another lighted by a small glass window.  The landlord
attended us with great civility, and told us what he could give us to eat
and drink.  I found some books on a shelf, among which were a volume or
more of Prideaux's Connection.

This I mentioned as something unexpected, and perceived that I did not
please him.  I praised the propriety of his language, and was answered
that I need not wonder, for he had learned it by grammar.

By subsequent opportunities of observation, I found that my host's
diction had nothing peculiar.  Those Highlanders that can speak English,
commonly speak it well, with few of the words, and little of the tone by
which a Scotchman is distinguished.  Their language seems to have been
learned in the army or the navy, or by some communication with those who
could give them good examples of accent and pronunciation.  By their
Lowland neighbours they would not willingly be taught; for they have long
considered them as a mean and degenerate race.  These prejudices are
wearing fast away; but so much of them still remains, that when I asked a
very learned minister in the islands, which they considered as their most
savage clans: 'Those,' said he, 'that live next the Lowlands.'

As we came hither early in the day, we had time sufficient to survey the
place.  The house was built like other huts of loose stones, but the part
in which we dined and slept was lined with turf and wattled with twigs,
which kept the earth from falling.  Near it was a garden of turnips and a
field of potatoes.  It stands in a glen, or valley, pleasantly watered by
a winding river.  But this country, however it may delight the gazer or
amuse the naturalist, is of no great advantage to its owners.  Our
landlord told us of a gentleman, who possesses lands, eighteen Scotch
miles in length, and three in breadth; a space containing at least a
hundred square English miles.  He has raised his rents, to the danger of
depopulating his farms, and he fells his timber, and by exerting every
art of augmentation, has obtained an yearly revenue of four hundred
pounds, which for a hundred square miles is three halfpence an acre.

Some time after dinner we were surprised by the entrance of a young
woman, not inelegant either in mien or dress, who asked us whether we
would have tea.  We found that she was the daughter of our host, and
desired her to make it.  Her conversation, like her appearance, was
gentle and pleasing.  We knew that the girls of the Highlands are all
gentlewomen, and treated her with great respect, which she received as
customary and due, and was neither elated by it, nor confused, but repaid
my civilities without embarassment, and told me how much I honoured her
country by coming to survey it.

She had been at Inverness to gain the common female qualifications, and
had, like her father, the English pronunciation.  I presented her with a
book, which I happened to have about me, and should not be pleased to
think that she forgets me.

In the evening the soldiers, whom we had passed on the road, came to
spend at our inn the little money that we had given them.  They had the
true military impatience of coin in their pockets, and had marched at
least six miles to find the first place where liquor could be bought.
Having never been before in a place so wild and unfrequented, I was glad
of their arrival, because I knew that we had made them friends, and to
gain still more of their good will, we went to them, where they were
carousing in the barn, and added something to our former gift.  All that
we gave was not much, but it detained them in the barn, either merry or
quarrelling, the whole night, and in the morning they went back to their
work, with great indignation at the bad qualities of whisky.

We had gained so much the favour of our host, that, when we left his
house in the morning, he walked by us a great way, and entertained us
with conversation both on his own condition, and that of the country.  His
life seemed to be merely pastoral, except that he differed from some of
the ancient Nomades in having a settled dwelling.  His wealth consists of
one hundred sheep, as many goats, twelve milk-cows, and twenty-eight
beeves ready for the drover.

From him we first heard of the general dissatisfaction, which is now
driving the Highlanders into the other hemisphere; and when I asked him
whether they would stay at home, if they were well treated, he answered
with indignation, that no man willingly left his native country.  Of the
farm, which he himself occupied, the rent had, in twenty-five years, been
advanced from five to twenty pounds, which he found himself so little
able to pay, that he would be glad to try his fortune in some other
place.  Yet he owned the reasonableness of raising the Highland rents in
a certain degree, and declared himself willing to pay ten pounds for the
ground which he had formerly had for five.

Our host having amused us for a time, resigned us to our guides.  The
journey of this day was long, not that the distance was great, but that
the way was difficult.  We were now in the bosom of the Highlands, with
full leisure to contemplate the appearance and properties of mountainous
regions, such as have been, in many countries, the last shelters of
national distress, and are every where the scenes of adventures,
stratagems, surprises and escapes.

Mountainous countries are not passed but with difficulty, not merely from
the labour of climbing; for to climb is not always necessary: but because
that which is not mountain is commonly bog, through which the way must be
picked with caution.  Where there are hills, there is much rain, and the
torrents pouring down into the intermediate spaces, seldom find so ready
an outlet, as not to stagnate, till they have broken the texture of the
ground.

Of the hills, which our journey offered to the view on either side, we
did not take the height, nor did we see any that astonished us with their
loftiness.  Towards the summit of one, there was a white spot, which I
should have called a naked rock, but the guides, who had better eyes, and
were acquainted with the phenomena of the country, declared it to be
snow.  It had already lasted to the end of August, and was likely to
maintain its contest with the sun, till it should be reinforced by
winter.

The height of mountains philosophically considered is properly computed
from the surface of the next sea; but as it affects the eye or
imagination of the passenger, as it makes either a spectacle or an
obstruction, it must be reckoned from the place where the rise begins to
make a considerable angle with the plain.  In extensive continents the
land may, by gradual elevation, attain great height, without any other
appearance than that of a plane gently inclined, and if a hill placed
upon such raised ground be described, as having its altitude equal to the
whole space above the sea, the representation will be fallacious.

These mountains may be properly enough measured from the inland base; for
it is not much above the sea.  As we advanced at evening towards the
western coast, I did not observe the declivity to be greater than is
necessary for the discharge of the inland waters.

We passed many rivers and rivulets, which commonly ran with a clear
shallow stream over a hard pebbly bottom.  These channels, which seem so
much wider than the water that they convey would naturally require, are
formed by the violence of wintry floods, produced by the accumulation of
innumerable streams that fall in rainy weather from the hills, and
bursting away with resistless impetuosity, make themselves a passage
proportionate to their mass.

Such capricious and temporary waters cannot be expected to produce many
fish.  The rapidity of the wintry deluge sweeps them away, and the
scantiness of the summer stream would hardly sustain them above the
ground.  This is the reason why in fording the northern rivers, no fishes
are seen, as in England, wandering in the water.

Of the hills many may be called with Homer's Ida 'abundant in springs',
but few can deserve the epithet which he bestows upon Pelion by 'waving
their leaves.'  They exhibit very little variety; being almost wholly
covered with dark heath, and even that seems to be checked in its growth.
What is not heath is nakedness, a little diversified by now and then a
stream rushing down the steep.  An eye accustomed to flowery pastures and
waving harvests is astonished and repelled by this wide extent of
hopeless sterility.  The appearance is that of matter incapable of form
or usefulness, dismissed by nature from her care and disinherited of her
favours, left in its original elemental state, or quickened only with one
sullen power of useless vegetation.

It will very readily occur, that this uniformity of barrenness can afford
very little amusement to the traveller; that it is easy to sit at home
and conceive rocks and heath, and waterfalls; and that these journeys are
useless labours, which neither impregnate the imagination, nor enlarge
the understanding.  It is true that of far the greater part of things, we
must content ourselves with such knowledge as description may exhibit, or
analogy supply; but it is true likewise, that these ideas are always
incomplete, and that at least, till we have compared them with realities,
we do not know them to be just.  As we see more, we become possessed of
more certainties, and consequently gain more principles of reasoning, and
found a wider basis of analogy.

Regions mountainous and wild, thinly inhabited, and little cultivated,
make a great part of the earth, and he that has never seen them, must
live unacquainted with much of the face of nature, and with one of the
great scenes of human existence.

As the day advanced towards noon, we entered a narrow valley not very
flowery, but sufficiently verdant.  Our guides told us, that the horses
could not travel all day without rest or meat, and intreated us to stop
here, because no grass would be found in any other place.  The request
was reasonable and the argument cogent.  We therefore willingly
dismounted and diverted ourselves as the place gave us opportunity.

I sat down on a bank, such as a writer of Romance might have delighted to
feign.  I had indeed no trees to whisper over my head, but a clear
rivulet streamed at my feet.  The day was calm, the air soft, and all was
rudeness, silence, and solitude.  Before me, and on either side, were
high hills, which by hindering the eye from ranging, forced the mind to
find entertainment for itself.  Whether I spent the hour well I know not;
for here I first conceived the thought of this narration.

We were in this place at ease and by choice, and had no evils to suffer
or to fear; yet the imaginations excited by the view of an unknown and
untravelled wilderness are not such as arise in the artificial solitude
of parks and gardens, a flattering notion of self-sufficiency, a placid
indulgence of voluntary delusions, a secure expansion of the fancy, or a
cool concentration of the mental powers.  The phantoms which haunt a
desert are want, and misery, and danger; the evils of dereliction rush
upon the thoughts; man is made unwillingly acquainted with his own
weakness, and meditation shows him only how little he can sustain, and
how little he can perform.  There were no traces of inhabitants, except
perhaps a rude pile of clods called a summer hut, in which a herdsman had
rested in the favourable seasons.  Whoever had been in the place where I
then sat, unprovided with provisions and ignorant of the country, might,
at least before the roads were made, have wandered among the rocks, till
he had perished with hardship, before he could have found either food or
shelter.  Yet what are these hillocks to the ridges of Taurus, or these
spots of wildness to the desarts of America?

It was not long before we were invited to mount, and continued our
journey along the side of a lough, kept full by many streams, which with
more or less rapidity and noise, crossed the road from the hills on the
other hand.  These currents, in their diminished state, after several dry
months, afford, to one who has always lived in level countries, an
unusual and delightful spectacle; but in the rainy season, such as every
winter may be expected to bring, must precipitate an impetuous and
tremendous flood.  I suppose the way by which we went, is at that time
impassable.




GLENSHEALS


The lough at last ended in a river broad and shallow like the rest, but
that it may be passed when it is deeper, there is a bridge over it.
Beyond it is a valley called Glensheals, inhabited by the clan of Macrae.
Here we found a village called Auknasheals, consisting of many huts,
perhaps twenty, built all of dry-stone, that is, stones piled up without
mortar.

We had, by the direction of the officers at Fort Augustus, taken bread
for ourselves, and tobacco for those Highlanders who might show us any
kindness.  We were now at a place where we could obtain milk, but we must
have wanted bread if we had not brought it.  The people of this valley
did not appear to know any English, and our guides now became doubly
necessary as interpreters.  A woman, whose hut was distinguished by
greater spaciousness and better architecture, brought out some pails of
milk.  The villagers gathered about us in considerable numbers, I believe
without any evil intention, but with a very savage wildness of aspect and
manner.  When our meal was over, Mr. Boswell sliced the bread, and
divided it amongst them, as he supposed them never to have tasted a
wheaten loaf before.  He then gave them little pieces of twisted tobacco,
and among the children we distributed a small handful of halfpence, which
they received with great eagerness.  Yet I have been since told, that the
people of that valley are not indigent; and when we mentioned them
afterwards as needy and pitiable, a Highland lady let us know, that we
might spare our commiseration; for the dame whose milk we drank had
probably more than a dozen milk-cows.  She seemed unwilling to take any
price, but being pressed to make a demand, at last named a shilling.
Honesty is not greater where elegance is less.  One of the bystanders, as
we were told afterwards, advised her to ask for more, but she said a
shilling was enough.  We gave her half a crown, and I hope got some
credit for our behaviour; for the company said, if our interpreters did
not flatter us, that they had not seen such a day since the old laird of
Macleod passed through their country.

The Macraes, as we heard afterwards in the Hebrides, were originally an
indigent and subordinate clan, and having no farms nor stock, were in
great numbers servants to the Maclellans, who, in the war of Charles the
First, took arms at the call of the heroic Montrose, and were, in one of
his battles, almost all destroyed.  The women that were left at home,
being thus deprived of their husbands, like the Scythian ladies of old,
married their servants, and the Macraes became a considerable race.




THE HIGHLANDS


As we continued our journey, we were at leisure to extend our
speculations, and to investigate the reason of those peculiarities by
which such rugged regions as these before us are generally distinguished.

Mountainous countries commonly contain the original, at least the oldest
race of inhabitants, for they are not easily conquered, because they must
be entered by narrow ways, exposed to every power of mischief from those
that occupy the heights; and every new ridge is a new fortress, where the
defendants have again the same advantages.  If the assailants either
force the strait, or storm the summit, they gain only so much ground;
their enemies are fled to take possession of the next rock, and the
pursuers stand at gaze, knowing neither where the ways of escape wind
among the steeps, nor where the bog has firmness to sustain them: besides
that, mountaineers have an agility in climbing and descending distinct
from strength or courage, and attainable only by use.

If the war be not soon concluded, the invaders are dislodged by hunger;
for in those anxious and toilsome marches, provisions cannot easily be
carried, and are never to be found.  The wealth of mountains is cattle,
which, while the men stand in the passes, the women drive away.  Such
lands at last cannot repay the expence of conquest, and therefore perhaps
have not been so often invaded by the mere ambition of dominion; as by
resentment of robberies and insults, or the desire of enjoying in
security the more fruitful provinces.

As mountains are long before they are conquered, they are likewise long
before they are civilized.  Men are softened by intercourse mutually
profitable, and instructed by comparing their own notions with those of
others.  Thus Caesar found the maritime parts of Britain made less
barbarous by their commerce with the Gauls.  Into a barren and rough
tract no stranger is brought either by the hope of gain or of pleasure.
The inhabitants having neither commodities for sale, nor money for
purchase, seldom visit more polished places, or if they do visit them,
seldom return.

It sometimes happens that by conquest, intermixture, or gradual
refinement, the cultivated parts of a country change their language.  The
mountaineers then become a distinct nation, cut off by dissimilitude of
speech from conversation with their neighbours.  Thus in Biscay, the
original Cantabrian, and in Dalecarlia, the old Swedish still subsists.
Thus Wales and the Highlands speak the tongue of the first inhabitants of
Britain, while the other parts have received first the Saxon, and in some
degree afterwards the French, and then formed a third language between
them.

That the primitive manners are continued where the primitive language is
spoken, no nation will desire me to suppose, for the manners of
mountaineers are commonly savage, but they are rather produced by their
situation than derived from their ancestors.

Such seems to be the disposition of man, that whatever makes a
distinction produces rivalry.  England, before other causes of enmity
were found, was disturbed for some centuries by the contests of the
northern and southern counties; so that at Oxford, the peace of study
could for a long time be preserved only by chusing annually one of the
Proctors from each side of the Trent.  A tract intersected by many ridges
of mountains, naturally divides its inhabitants into petty nations, which
are made by a thousand causes enemies to each other.  Each will exalt its
own chiefs, each will boast the valour of its men, or the beauty of its
women, and every claim of superiority irritates competition; injuries
will sometimes be done, and be more injuriously defended; retaliation
will sometimes be attempted, and the debt exacted with too much interest.

In the Highlands it was a law, that if a robber was sheltered from
justice, any man of the same clan might be taken in his place.  This was
a kind of irregular justice, which, though necessary in savage times,
could hardly fail to end in a feud, and a feud once kindled among an idle
people with no variety of pursuits to divert their thoughts, burnt on for
ages either sullenly glowing in secret mischief, or openly blazing into
public violence.  Of the effects of this violent judicature, there are
not wanting memorials.  The cave is now to be seen to which one of the
Campbells, who had injured the Macdonalds, retired with a body of his own
clan.  The Macdonalds required the offender, and being refused, made a
fire at the mouth of the cave, by which he and his adherents were
suffocated together.

Mountaineers are warlike, because by their feuds and competitions they
consider themselves as surrounded with enemies, and are always prepared
to repel incursions, or to make them.  Like the Greeks in their
unpolished state, described by Thucydides, the Highlanders, till lately,
went always armed, and carried their weapons to visits, and to church.

Mountaineers are thievish, because they are poor, and having neither
manufactures nor commerce, can grow richer only by robbery.  They
regularly plunder their neighbours, for their neighbours are commonly
their enemies; and having lost that reverence for property, by which the
order of civil life is preserved, soon consider all as enemies, whom they
do not reckon as friends, and think themselves licensed to invade
whatever they are not obliged to protect.

By a strict administration of the laws, since the laws have been
introduced into the Highlands, this disposition to thievery is very much
represt.  Thirty years ago no herd had ever been conducted through the
mountains, without paying tribute in the night, to some of the clans; but
cattle are now driven, and passengers travel without danger, fear, or
molestation.

Among a warlike people, the quality of highest esteem is personal
courage, and with the ostentatious display of courage are closely
connected promptitude of offence and quickness of resentment.  The
Highlanders, before they were disarmed, were so addicted to quarrels,
that the boys used to follow any publick procession or ceremony, however
festive, or however solemn, in expectation of the battle, which was sure
to happen before the company dispersed.

Mountainous regions are sometimes so remote from the seat of government,
and so difficult of access, that they are very little under the influence
of the sovereign, or within the reach of national justice.  Law is
nothing without power; and the sentence of a distant court could not be
easily executed, nor perhaps very safely promulgated, among men
ignorantly proud and habitually violent, unconnected with the general
system, and accustomed to reverence only their own lords.  It has
therefore been necessary to erect many particular jurisdictions, and
commit the punishment of crimes, and the decision of right to the
proprietors of the country who could enforce their own decrees.  It
immediately appears that such judges will be often ignorant, and often
partial; but in the immaturity of political establishments no better
expedient could be found.  As government advances towards perfection,
provincial judicature is perhaps in every empire gradually abolished.

Those who had thus the dispensation of law, were by consequence
themselves lawless.  Their vassals had no shelter from outrages and
oppressions; but were condemned to endure, without resistance, the
caprices of wantonness, and the rage of cruelty.

In the Highlands, some great lords had an hereditary jurisdiction over
counties; and some chieftains over their own lands; till the final
conquest of the Highlands afforded an opportunity of crushing all the
local courts, and of extending the general benefits of equal law to the
low and the high, in the deepest recesses and obscurest corners.

While the chiefs had this resemblance of royalty, they had little
inclination to appeal, on any question, to superior judicatures.  A claim
of lands between two powerful lairds was decided like a contest for
dominion between sovereign powers.  They drew their forces into the
field, and right attended on the strongest.  This was, in ruder times,
the common practice, which the kings of Scotland could seldom control.

Even so lately as in the last years of King William, a battle was fought
at Mull Roy, on a plain a few miles to the south of Inverness, between
the clans of Mackintosh and Macdonald of Keppoch.  Col.  Macdonald, the
head of a small clan, refused to pay the dues demanded from him by
Mackintosh, as his superior lord.  They disdained the interposition of
judges and laws, and calling each his followers to maintain the dignity
of the clan, fought a formal battle, in which several considerable men
fell on the side of Mackintosh, without a complete victory to either.
This is said to have been the last open war made between the clans by
their own authority.

The Highland lords made treaties, and formed alliances, of which some
traces may still be found, and some consequences still remain as lasting
evidences of petty regality.  The terms of one of these confederacies
were, that each should support the other in the right, or in the wrong,
except against the king.

The inhabitants of mountains form distinct races, and are careful to
preserve their genealogies.  Men in a small district necessarily mingle
blood by intermarriages, and combine at last into one family, with a
common interest in the honour and disgrace of every individual.  Then
begins that union of affections, and co-operation of endeavours, that
constitute a clan.  They who consider themselves as ennobled by their
family, will think highly of their progenitors, and they who through
successive generations live always together in the same place, will
preserve local stories and hereditary prejudices.  Thus every Highlander
can talk of his ancestors, and recount the outrages which they suffered
from the wicked inhabitants of the next valley.

Such are the effects of habitation among mountains, and such were the
qualities of the Highlanders, while their rocks secluded them from the
rest of mankind, and kept them an unaltered and discriminated race.  They
are now losing their distinction, and hastening to mingle with the
general community.




GLENELG


We left Auknasheals and the Macraes its the afternoon, and in the evening
came to Ratiken, a high hill on which a road is cut, but so steep and
narrow, that it is very difficult.  There is now a design of making
another way round the bottom.  Upon one of the precipices, my horse,
weary with the steepness of the rise, staggered a little, and I called in
haste to the Highlander to hold him.  This was the only moment of my
journey, in which I thought myself endangered.

Having surmounted the hill at last, we were told that at Glenelg, on the
sea-side, we should come to a house of lime and slate and glass.  This
image of magnificence raised our expectation.  At last we came to our inn
weary and peevish, and began to inquire for meat and beds.

Of the provisions the negative catalogue was very copious.  Here was no
meat, no milk, no bread, no eggs, no wine.  We did not express much
satisfaction.  Here however we were to stay.  Whisky we might have, and I
believe at last they caught a fowl and killed it.  We had some bread, and
with that we prepared ourselves to be contented, when we had a very
eminent proof of Highland hospitality.  Along some miles of the way, in
the evening, a gentleman's servant had kept us company on foot with very
little notice on our part.  He left us near Glenelg, and we thought on
him no more till he came to us again, in about two hours, with a present
from his master of rum and sugar.  The man had mentioned his company, and
the gentleman, whose name, I think, is Gordon, well knowing the penury of
the place, had this attention to two men, whose names perhaps he had not
heard, by whom his kindness was not likely to be ever repaid, and who
could be recommended to him only by their necessities.

We were now to examine our lodging.  Out of one of the beds, on which we
were to repose, started up, at our entrance, a man black as a Cyclops
from the forge.  Other circumstances of no elegant recital concurred to
disgust us.  We had been frighted by a lady at Edinburgh, with
discouraging representations of Highland lodgings.  Sleep, however, was
necessary.  Our Highlanders had at last found some hay, with which the
inn could not supply them.  I directed them to bring a bundle into the
room, and slept upon it in my riding coat.  Mr. Boswell being more
delicate, laid himself sheets with hay over and under him, and lay in
linen like a gentleman.




SKY.  ARMIDEL


In the morning, September the second, we found ourselves on the edge of
the sea.  Having procured a boat, we dismissed our Highlanders, whom I
would recommend to the service of any future travellers, and were ferried
over to the Isle of Sky.  We landed at Armidel, where we were met on the
sands by Sir Alexander Macdonald, who was at that time there with his
lady, preparing to leave the island and reside at Edinburgh.

Armidel is a neat house, built where the Macdonalds had once a seat,
which was burnt in the commotions that followed the Revolution.  The
walled orchard, which belonged to the former house, still remains.  It is
well shaded by tall ash trees, of a species, as Mr. Janes the fossilist
informed me, uncommonly valuable.  This plantation is very properly
mentioned by Dr. Campbell, in his new account of the state of Britain,
and deserves attention; because it proves that the present nakedness of
the Hebrides is not wholly the fault of Nature.

As we sat at Sir Alexander's table, we were entertained, according to the
ancient usage of the North, with the melody of the bagpipe.  Everything
in those countries has its history.  As the bagpiper was playing, an
elderly Gentleman informed us, that in some remote time, the Macdonalds
of Glengary having been injured, or offended by the inhabitants of
Culloden, and resolving to have justice or vengeance, came to Culloden on
a Sunday, where finding their enemies at worship, they shut them up in
the church, which they set on fire; and this, said he, is the tune that
the piper played while they were burning.

Narrations like this, however uncertain, deserve the notice of the
traveller, because they are the only records of a nation that has no
historians, and afford the most genuine representation of the life and
character of the ancient Highlanders.

Under the denomination of Highlander are comprehended in Scotland all
that now speak the Erse language, or retain the primitive manners,
whether they live among the mountains or in the islands; and in that
sense I use the name, when there is not some apparent reason for making a
distinction.

In Sky I first observed the use of Brogues, a kind of artless shoes,
stitched with thongs so loosely, that though they defend the foot from
stones, they do not exclude water.  Brogues were formerly made of raw
hides, with the hair inwards, and such are perhaps still used in rude and
remote parts; but they are said not to last above two days.  Where life
is somewhat improved, they are now made of leather tanned with oak bark,
as in other places, or with the bark of birch, or roots of tormentil, a
substance recommended in defect of bark, about forty years ago, to the
Irish tanners, by one to whom the parliament of that kingdom voted a
reward.  The leather of Sky is not completely penetrated by vegetable
matter, and therefore cannot be very durable.

My inquiries about brogues, gave me an early specimen of Highland
information.  One day I was told, that to make brogues was a domestick
art, which every man practised for himself, and that a pair of brogues
was the work of an hour.  I supposed that the husband made brogues as the
wife made an apron, till next day it was told me, that a brogue-maker was
a trade, and that a pair would cost half a crown.  It will easily occur
that these representations may both be true, and that, in some places,
men may buy them, and in others, make them for themselves; but I had both
the accounts in the same house within two days.

Many of my subsequent inquiries upon more interesting topicks ended in
the like uncertainty.  He that travels in the Highlands may easily
saturate his soul with intelligence, if he will acquiesce in the first
account.  The Highlander gives to every question an answer so prompt and
peremptory, that skepticism itself is dared into silence, and the mind
sinks before the bold reporter in unresisting credulity; but, if a second
question be ventured, it breaks the enchantment; for it is immediately
discovered, that what was told so confidently was told at hazard, and
that such fearlessness of assertion was either the sport of negligence,
or the refuge of ignorance.

If individuals are thus at variance with themselves, it can be no wonder
that the accounts of different men are contradictory.  The traditions of
an ignorant and savage people have been for ages negligently heard, and
unskilfully related.  Distant events must have been mingled together, and
the actions of one man given to another.  These, however, are
deficiencies in story, for which no man is now to be censured.  It were
enough, if what there is yet opportunity of examining were accurately
inspected, and justly represented; but such is the laxity of Highland
conversation, that the inquirer is kept in continual suspense, and by a
kind of intellectual retrogradation, knows less as he hears more.

In the islands the plaid is rarely worn.  The law by which the
Highlanders have been obliged to change the form of their dress, has, in
all the places that we have visited, been universally obeyed.  I have
seen only one gentleman completely clothed in the ancient habit, and by
him it was worn only occasionally and wantonly.  The common people do not
think themselves under any legal necessity of having coats; for they say
that the law against plaids was made by Lord Hardwicke, and was in force
only for his life: but the same poverty that made it then difficult for
them to change their clothing, hinders them now from changing it again.

The fillibeg, or lower garment, is still very common, and the bonnet
almost universal; but their attire is such as produces, in a sufficient
degree, the effect intended by the law, of abolishing the dissimilitude
of appearance between the Highlanders and the other inhabitants of
Britain; and, if dress be supposed to have much influence, facilitates
their coalition with their fellow-subjects.

What we have long used we naturally like, and therefore the Highlanders
were unwilling to lay aside their plaid, which yet to an unprejudiced
spectator must appear an incommodious and cumbersome dress; for hanging
loose upon the body, it must flutter in a quick motion, or require one of
the hands to keep it close.  The Romans always laid aside the gown when
they had anything to do.  It was a dress so unsuitable to war, that the
same word which signified a gown signified peace.  The chief use of a
plaid seems to be this, that they could commodiously wrap themselves in
it, when they were obliged to sleep without a better cover.

In our passage from Scotland to Sky, we were wet for the first time with
a shower.  This was the beginning of the Highland winter, after which we
were told that a succession of three dry days was not to be expected for
many months.  The winter of the Hebrides consists of little more than
rain and wind.  As they are surrounded by an ocean never frozen, the
blasts that come to them over the water are too much softened to have the
power of congelation.  The salt loughs, or inlets of the sea, which shoot
very far into the island, never have any ice upon them, and the pools of
fresh water will never bear the walker.  The snow that sometimes falls,
is soon dissolved by the air, or the rain.

This is not the description of a cruel climate, yet the dark months are
here a time of great distress; because the summer can do little more than
feed itself, and winter comes with its cold and its scarcity upon
families very slenderly provided.




CORIATACHAN IN SKY


The third or fourth day after our arrival at Armidel, brought us an
invitation to the isle of Raasay, which lies east of Sky.  It is
incredible how soon the account of any event is propagated in these
narrow countries by the love of talk, which much leisure produces, and
the relief given to the mind in the penury of insular conversation by a
new topick.  The arrival of strangers at a place so rarely visited,
excites rumour, and quickens curiosity.  I know not whether we touched at
any corner, where Fame had not already prepared us a reception.

To gain a commodious passage to Raasay, it was necessary to pass over a
large part of Sky.  We were furnished therefore with horses and a guide.
In the Islands there are no roads, nor any marks by which a stranger may
find his way.  The horseman has always at his side a native of the place,
who, by pursuing game, or tending cattle, or being often employed in
messages or conduct, has learned where the ridge of the hill has breadth
sufficient to allow a horse and his rider a passage, and where the moss
or bog is hard enough to bear them.  The bogs are avoided as toilsome at
least, if not unsafe, and therefore the journey is made generally from
precipice to precipice; from which if the eye ventures to look down, it
sees below a gloomy cavity, whence the rush of water is sometimes heard.

But there seems to be in all this more alarm than danger.  The Highlander
walks carefully before, and the horse, accustomed to the ground, follows
him with little deviation.  Sometimes the hill is too steep for the
horseman to keep his seat, and sometimes the moss is too tremulous to
bear the double weight of horse and man.  The rider then dismounts, and
all shift as they can.

Journies made in this manner are rather tedious than long.  A very few
miles require several hours.  From Armidel we came at night to
Coriatachan, a house very pleasantly situated between two brooks, with
one of the highest hills of the island behind it.  It is the residence of
Mr. Mackinnon, by whom we were treated with very liberal hospitality,
among a more numerous and elegant company than it could have been
supposed easy to collect.

The hill behind the house we did not climb.  The weather was rough, and
the height and steepness discouraged us.  We were told that there is a
cairne upon it.  A cairne is a heap of stones thrown upon the grave of
one eminent for dignity of birth, or splendour of atchievements.  It is
said that by digging, an urn is always found under these cairnes: they
must therefore have been thus piled by a people whose custom was to burn
the dead.  To pile stones is, I believe, a northern custom, and to burn
the body was the Roman practice; nor do I know when it was that these two
acts of sepulture were united.

The weather was next day too violent for the continuation of our journey;
but we had no reason to complain of the interruption.  We saw in every
place, what we chiefly desired to know, the manners of the people.  We
had company, and, if we had chosen retirement, we might have had books.

I never was in any house of the Islands, where I did not find books in
more languages than one, if I staid long enough to want them, except one
from which the family was removed.  Literature is not neglected by the
higher rank of the Hebridians.

It need not, I suppose, be mentioned, that in countries so little
frequented as the Islands, there are no houses where travellers are
entertained for money.  He that wanders about these wilds, either
procures recommendations to those whose habitations lie near his way, or,
when night and weariness come upon him, takes the chance of general
hospitality.  If he finds only a cottage, he can expect little more than
shelter; for the cottagers have little more for themselves: but if his
good fortune brings him to the residence of a gentleman, he will be glad
of a storm to prolong his stay.  There is, however, one inn by the sea-
side at Sconsor, in Sky, where the post-office is kept.

At the tables where a stranger is received, neither plenty nor delicacy
is wanting.  A tract of land so thinly inhabited, must have much wild-
fowl; and I scarcely remember to have seen a dinner without them.  The
moorgame is every where to be had.  That the sea abounds with fish, needs
not be told, for it supplies a great part of Europe.  The Isle of Sky has
stags and roebucks, but no hares.  They sell very numerous droves of oxen
yearly to England, and therefore cannot be supposed to want beef at home.
Sheep and goats are in great numbers, and they have the common domestick
fowls.

But as here is nothing to be bought, every family must kill its own meat,
and roast part of it somewhat sooner than Apicius would prescribe.  Every
kind of flesh is undoubtedly excelled by the variety and emulation of
English markets; but that which is not best may be yet very far from bad,
and he that shall complain of his fare in the Hebrides, has improved his
delicacy more than his manhood.

Their fowls are not like those plumped for sale by the poulterers of
London, but they are as good as other places commonly afford, except that
the geese, by feeding in the sea, have universally a fishy rankness.

These geese seem to be of a middle race, between the wild and domestick
kinds.  They are so tame as to own a home, and so wild as sometimes to
fly quite away.

Their native bread is made of oats, or barley.  Of oatmeal they spread
very thin cakes, coarse and hard, to which unaccustomed palates are not
easily reconciled.  The barley cakes are thicker and softer; I began to
eat them without unwillingness; the blackness of their colour raises some
dislike, but the taste is not disagreeable.  In most houses there is
wheat flower, with which we were sure to be treated, if we staid long
enough to have it kneaded and baked.  As neither yeast nor leaven are
used among them, their bread of every kind is unfermented.  They make
only cakes, and never mould a loaf.

A man of the Hebrides, for of the women's diet I can give no account, as
soon as he appears in the morning, swallows a glass of whisky; yet they
are not a drunken race, at least I never was present at much
intemperance; but no man is so abstemious as to refuse the morning dram,
which they call a skalk.

The word whisky signifies water, and is applied by way of eminence to
strong water, or distilled liquor.  The spirit drunk in the North is
drawn from barley.  I never tasted it, except once for experiment at the
inn in Inverary, when I thought it preferable to any English malt brandy.
It was strong, but not pungent, and was free from the empyreumatick taste
or smell.  What was the process I had no opportunity of inquiring, nor do
I wish to improve the art of making poison pleasant.

Not long after the dram, may be expected the breakfast, a meal in which
the Scots, whether of the lowlands or mountains, must be confessed to
excel us.  The tea and coffee are accompanied not only with butter, but
with honey, conserves, and marmalades.  If an epicure could remove by a
wish, in quest of sensual gratifications, wherever he had supped he would
breakfast in Scotland.

In the islands however, they do what I found it not very easy to endure.
They pollute the tea-table by plates piled with large slices of cheshire
cheese, which mingles its less grateful odours with the fragrance of the
tea.

Where many questions are to be asked, some will be omitted.  I forgot to
inquire how they were supplied with so much exotic luxury.  Perhaps the
French may bring them wine for wool, and the Dutch give them tea and
coffee at the fishing season, in exchange for fresh provision.  Their
trade is unconstrained; they pay no customs, for there is no officer to
demand them; whatever therefore is made dear only by impost, is obtained
here at an easy rate.

A dinner in the Western Islands differs very little from a dinner in
England, except that in the place of tarts, there are always set
different preparations of milk.  This part of their diet will admit some
improvement.  Though they have milk, and eggs, and sugar, few of them
know how to compound them in a custard.  Their gardens afford them no
great variety, but they have always some vegetables on the table.
Potatoes at least are never wanting, which, though they have not known
them long, are now one of the principal parts of their food.  They are
not of the mealy, but the viscous kind.

Their more elaborate cookery, or made dishes, an Englishman at the first
taste is not likely to approve, but the culinary compositions of every
country are often such as become grateful to other nations only by
degrees; though I have read a French author, who, in the elation of his
heart, says, that French cookery pleases all foreigners, but foreign
cookery never satisfies a Frenchman.

Their suppers are, like their dinners, various and plentiful.  The table
is always covered with elegant linen.  Their plates for common use are
often of that kind of manufacture which is called cream coloured, or
queen's ware.  They use silver on all occasions where it is common in
England, nor did I ever find the spoon of horn, but in one house.

The knives are not often either very bright, or very sharp.  They are
indeed instruments of which the Highlanders have not been long acquainted
with the general use.  They were not regularly laid on the table, before
the prohibition of arms, and the change of dress.  Thirty years ago the
Highlander wore his knife as a companion to his dirk or dagger, and when
the company sat down to meat, the men who had knives, cut the flesh into
small pieces for the women, who with their fingers conveyed it to their
mouths.

There was perhaps never any change of national manners so quick, so
great, and so general, as that which has operated in the Highlands, by
the last conquest, and the subsequent laws.  We came thither too late to
see what we expected, a people of peculiar appearance, and a system of
antiquated life.  The clans retain little now of their original
character, their ferocity of temper is softened, their military ardour is
extinguished, their dignity of independence is depressed, their contempt
of government subdued, and the reverence for their chiefs abated.  Of
what they had before the late conquest of their country, there remain
only their language and their poverty.  Their language is attacked on
every side.  Schools are erected, in which English only is taught, and
there were lately some who thought it reasonable to refuse them a version
of the holy scriptures, that they might have no monument of their mother-
tongue.

That their poverty is gradually abated, cannot be mentioned among the
unpleasing consequences of subjection.  They are now acquainted with
money, and the possibility of gain will by degrees make them industrious.
Such is the effect of the late regulations, that a longer journey than to
the Highlands must be taken by him whose curiosity pants for savage
virtues and barbarous grandeur.




RAASAY


At the first intermission of the stormy weather we were informed, that
the boat, which was to convey us to Raasay, attended us on the coast.  We
had from this time our intelligence facilitated, and our conversation
enlarged, by the company of Mr. Macqueen, minister of a parish in Sky,
whose knowledge and politeness give him a title equally to kindness and
respect, and who, from this time, never forsook us till we were preparing
to leave Sky, and the adjacent places.

The boat was under the direction of Mr. Malcolm Macleod, a gentleman of
Raasay.  The water was calm, and the rowers were vigorous; so that our
passage was quick and pleasant.  When we came near the island, we saw the
laird's house, a neat modern fabrick, and found Mr. Macleod, the
proprietor of the Island, with many gentlemen, expecting us on the beach.
We had, as at all other places, some difficulty in landing.  The craggs
were irregularly broken, and a false step would have been very
mischievous.

It seemed that the rocks might, with no great labour, have been hewn
almost into a regular flight of steps; and as there are no other landing
places, I considered this rugged ascent as the consequence of a form of
life inured to hardships, and therefore not studious of nice
accommodations.  But I know not whether, for many ages, it was not
considered as a part of military policy, to keep the country not easily
accessible.  The rocks are natural fortifications, and an enemy climbing
with difficulty, was easily destroyed by those who stood high above him.

Our reception exceeded our expectations.  We found nothing but civility,
elegance, and plenty.  After the usual refreshments, and the usual
conversation, the evening came upon us.  The carpet was then rolled off
the floor; the musician was called, and the whole company was invited to
dance, nor did ever fairies trip with greater alacrity.  The general air
of festivity, which predominated in this place, so far remote from all
those regions which the mind has been used to contemplate as the mansions
of pleasure, struck the imagination with a delightful surprise, analogous
to that which is felt at an unexpected emersion from darkness into light.

When it was time to sup, the dance ceased, and six and thirty persons sat
down to two tables in the same room.  After supper the ladies sung Erse
songs, to which I listened as an English audience to an Italian opera,
delighted with the sound of words which I did not understand.

I inquired the subjects of the songs, and was told of one, that it was a
love song, and of another, that it was a farewell composed by one of the
Islanders that was going, in this epidemical fury of emigration, to seek
his fortune in America.  What sentiments would arise, on such an
occasion, in the heart of one who had not been taught to lament by
precedent, I should gladly have known; but the lady, by whom I sat,
thought herself not equal to the work of translating.

Mr. Macleod is the proprietor of the islands of Raasay, Rona, and Fladda,
and possesses an extensive district in Sky.  The estate has not, during
four hundred years, gained or lost a single acre.  He acknowledges
Macleod of Dunvegan as his chief, though his ancestors have formerly
disputed the pre-eminence.

One of the old Highland alliances has continued for two hundred years,
and is still subsisting between Macleod of Raasay and Macdonald of Sky,
in consequence of which, the survivor always inherits the arms of the
deceased; a natural memorial of military friendship.  At the death of the
late Sir James Macdonald, his sword was delivered to the present laird of
Raasay.

The family of Raasay consists of the laird, the lady, three sons and ten
daughters.  For the sons there is a tutor in the house, and the lady is
said to be very skilful and diligent in the education of her girls.  More
gentleness of manners, or a more pleasing appearance of domestick
society, is not found in the most polished countries.

Raasay is the only inhabited island in Mr. Macleod's possession.  Rona
and Fladda afford only pasture for cattle, of which one hundred and sixty
winter in Rona, under the superintendence of a solitary herdsman.

The length of Raasay is, by computation, fifteen miles, and the breadth
two.  These countries have never been measured, and the computation by
miles is negligent and arbitrary.  We observed in travelling, that the
nominal and real distance of places had very little relation to each
other.  Raasay probably contains near a hundred square miles.  It affords
not much ground, notwithstanding its extent, either for tillage, or
pasture; for it is rough, rocky, and barren.  The cattle often perish by
falling from the precipices.  It is like the other islands, I think,
generally naked of shade, but it is naked by neglect; for the laird has
an orchard, and very large forest trees grow about his house.  Like other
hilly countries it has many rivulets.  One of the brooks turns a corn-
mill, and at least one produces trouts.

In the streams or fresh lakes of the Islands, I have never heard of any
other fish than trouts and eels.  The trouts, which I have seen, are not
large; the colour of their flesh is tinged as in England.  Of their eels
I can give no account, having never tasted them; for I believe they are
not considered as wholesome food.

It is not very easy to fix the principles upon which mankind have agreed
to eat some animals, and reject others; and as the principle is not
evident, it is not uniform.  That which is selected as delicate in one
country, is by its neighbours abhorred as loathsome.  The Neapolitans
lately refused to eat potatoes in a famine.  An Englishman is not easily
persuaded to dine on snails with an Italian, on frogs with a Frenchman,
or on horseflesh with a Tartar.  The vulgar inhabitants of Sky, I know
not whether of the other islands, have not only eels, but pork and bacon
in abhorrence, and accordingly I never saw a hog in the Hebrides, except
one at Dunvegan.

Raasay has wild fowl in abundance, but neither deer, hares, nor rabbits.
Why it has them not, might be asked, but that of such questions there is
no end.  Why does any nation want what it might have?  Why are not spices
transplanted to America?  Why does tea continue to be brought from China?
Life improves but by slow degrees, and much in every place is yet to do.
Attempts have been made to raise roebucks in Raasay, but without effect.
The young ones it is extremely difficult to rear, and the old can very
seldom be taken alive.

Hares and rabbits might be more easily obtained.  That they have few or
none of either in Sky, they impute to the ravage of the foxes, and have
therefore set, for some years past, a price upon their heads, which, as
the number was diminished, has been gradually raised, from three
shillings and sixpence to a guinea, a sum so great in this part of the
world, that, in a short time, Sky may be as free from foxes, as England
from wolves.  The fund for these rewards is a tax of sixpence in the
pound, imposed by the farmers on themselves, and said to be paid with
great willingness.

The beasts of prey in the Islands are foxes, otters, and weasels.  The
foxes are bigger than those of England; but the otters exceed ours in a
far greater proportion.  I saw one at Armidel, of a size much beyond that
which I supposed them ever to attain; and Mr. Maclean, the heir of Col, a
man of middle stature, informed me that he once shot an otter, of which
the tail reached the ground, when he held up the head to a level with his
own.  I expected the otter to have a foot particularly formed for the art
of swimming; but upon examination, I did not find it differing much from
that of a spaniel.  As he preys in the sea, he does little visible
mischief, and is killed only for his fur.  White otters are sometimes
seen.

In Raasay they might have hares and rabbits, for they have no foxes.  Some
depredations, such as were never made before, have caused a suspicion
that a fox has been lately landed in the Island by spite or wantonness.
This imaginary stranger has never yet been seen, and therefore, perhaps,
the mischief was done by some other animal.  It is not likely that a
creature so ungentle, whose head could have been sold in Sky for a
guinea, should be kept alive only to gratify the malice of sending him to
prey upon a neighbour: and the passage from Sky is wider than a fox would
venture to swim, unless he were chased by dogs into the sea, and perhaps
than his strength would enable him to cross.  How beasts of prey came
into any islands is not easy to guess.  In cold countries they take
advantage of hard winters, and travel over the ice: but this is a very
scanty solution; for they are found where they have no discoverable means
of coming.

The corn of this island is but little.  I saw the harvest of a small
field.  The women reaped the Corn, and the men bound up the sheaves.  The
strokes of the sickle were timed by the modulation of the harvest song,
in which all their voices were united.  They accompany in the Highlands
every action, which can be done in equal time, with an appropriated
strain, which has, they say, not much meaning; but its effects are
regularity and cheerfulness.  The ancient proceleusmatick song, by which
the rowers of gallies were animated, may be supposed to have been of this
kind.  There is now an oar-song used by the Hebridians.

The ground of Raasay seems fitter for cattle than for corn, and of black
cattle I suppose the number is very great.  The Laird himself keeps a
herd of four hundred, one hundred of which are annually sold.  Of an
extensive domain, which he holds in his own hands, he considers the sale
of cattle as repaying him the rent, and supports the plenty of a very
liberal table with the remaining product.

Raasay is supposed to have been very long inhabited.  On one side of it
they show caves, into which the rude nations of the first ages retreated
from the weather.  These dreary vaults might have had other uses.  There
is still a cavity near the house called the oar-cave, in which the
seamen, after one of those piratical expeditions, which in rougher times
were very frequent, used, as tradition tells, to hide their oars.  This
hollow was near the sea, that nothing so necessary might be far to be
fetched; and it was secret, that enemies, if they landed, could find
nothing.  Yet it is not very evident of what use it was to hide their
oars from those, who, if they were masters of the coast, could take away
their boats.

A proof much stronger of the distance at which the first possessors of
this island lived from the present time, is afforded by the stone heads
of arrows which are very frequently picked up.  The people call them Elf-
bolts, and believe that the fairies shoot them at the cattle.  They
nearly resemble those which Mr. Banks has lately brought from the savage
countries in the Pacifick Ocean, and must have been made by a nation to
which the use of metals was unknown.

The number of this little community has never been counted by its ruler,
nor have I obtained any positive account, consistent with the result of
political computation.  Not many years ago, the late Laird led out one
hundred men upon a military expedition.  The sixth part of a people is
supposed capable of bearing arms: Raasay had therefore six hundred
inhabitants.  But because it is not likely, that every man able to serve
in the field would follow the summons, or that the chief would leave his
lands totally defenceless, or take away all the hands qualified for
labour, let it be supposed, that half as many might be permitted to stay
at home.  The whole number will then be nine hundred, or nine to a square
mile; a degree of populousness greater than those tracts of desolation
can often show.  They are content with their country, and faithful to
their chiefs, and yet uninfected with the fever of migration.

Near the house, at Raasay, is a chapel unroofed and ruinous, which has
long been used only as a place of burial.  About the churches, in the
Islands, are small squares inclosed with stone, which belong to
particular families, as repositories for the dead.  At Raasay there is
one, I think, for the proprietor, and one for some collateral house.

It is told by Martin, that at the death of the Lady of the Island, it has
been here the custom to erect a cross.  This we found not to be true.  The
stones that stand about the chapel at a small distance, some of which
perhaps have crosses cut upon them, are believed to have been not funeral
monuments, but the ancient boundaries of the sanctuary or consecrated
ground.

Martin was a man not illiterate: he was an inhabitant of Sky, and
therefore was within reach of intelligence, and with no great difficulty
might have visited the places which he undertakes to describe; yet with
all his opportunities, he has often suffered himself to be deceived.  He
lived in the last century, when the chiefs of the clans had lost little
of their original influence.  The mountains were yet unpenetrated, no
inlet was opened to foreign novelties, and the feudal institution
operated upon life with their full force.  He might therefore have
displayed a series of subordination and a form of government, which, in
more luminous and improved regions, have been long forgotten, and have
delighted his readers with many uncouth customs that are now disused, and
wild opinions that prevail no longer.  But he probably had not knowledge
of the world sufficient to qualify him for judging what would deserve or
gain the attention of mankind.  The mode of life which was familiar to
himself, he did not suppose unknown to others, nor imagined that he could
give pleasure by telling that of which it was, in his little country,
impossible to be ignorant.

What he has neglected cannot now be performed.  In nations, where there
is hardly the use of letters, what is once out of sight is lost for ever.
They think but little, and of their few thoughts, none are wasted on the
past, in which they are neither interested by fear nor hope.  Their only
registers are stated observances and practical representations.  For this
reason an age of ignorance is an age of ceremony.  Pageants, and
processions, and commemorations, gradually shrink away, as better methods
come into use of recording events, and preserving rights.

It is not only in Raasay that the chapel is unroofed and useless; through
the few islands which we visited, we neither saw nor heard of any house
of prayer, except in Sky, that was not in ruins.  The malignant influence
of Calvinism has blasted ceremony and decency together; and if the
remembrance of papal superstition is obliterated, the monuments of papal
piety are likewise effaced.

It has been, for many years, popular to talk of the lazy devotion of the
Romish clergy; over the sleepy laziness of men that erected churches, we
may indulge our superiority with a new triumph, by comparing it with the
fervid activity of those who suffer them to fall.

Of the destruction of churches, the decay of religion must in time be the
consequence; for while the publick acts of the ministry are now performed
in houses, a very small number can be present; and as the greater part of
the Islanders make no use of books, all must necessarily live in total
ignorance who want the opportunity of vocal instruction.

From these remains of ancient sanctity, which are every where to be
found, it has been conjectured, that, for the last two centuries, the
inhabitants of the Islands have decreased in number.  This argument,
which supposes that the churches have been suffered to fall, only because
they were no longer necessary, would have some force, if the houses of
worship still remaining were sufficient for the people.  But since they
have now no churches at all, these venerable fragments do not prove the
people of former times to have been more numerous, but to have been more
devout.  If the inhabitants were doubled with their present principles,
it appears not that any provision for publick worship would be made.
Where the religion of a country enforces consecrated buildings, the
number of those buildings may be supposed to afford some indication,
however uncertain, of the populousness of the place; but where by a
change of manners a nation is contented to live without them, their decay
implies no diminution of inhabitants.

Some of these dilapidations are said to be found in islands now
uninhabited; but I doubt whether we can thence infer that they were ever
peopled.  The religion of the middle age, is well known to have placed
too much hope in lonely austerities.  Voluntary solitude was the great
act of propitiation, by which crimes were effaced, and conscience was
appeased; it is therefore not unlikely, that oratories were often built
in places where retirement was sure to have no disturbance.

Raasay has little that can detain a traveller, except the Laird and his
family; but their power wants no auxiliaries.  Such a seat of
hospitality, amidst the winds and waters, fills the imagination with a
delightful contrariety of images.  Without is the rough ocean and the
rocky land, the beating billows and the howling storm: within is plenty
and elegance, beauty and gaiety, the song and the dance.  In Raasay, if I
could have found an Ulysses, I had fancied a Phoeacia.




DUNVEGAN


At Raasay, by good fortune, Macleod, so the chief of the clan is called,
was paying a visit, and by him we were invited to his seat at Dunvegan.
Raasay has a stout boat, built in Norway, in which, with six oars, he
conveyed us back to Sky.  We landed at Port Re, so called, because James
the Fifth of Scotland, who had curiosity to visit the Islands, came into
it.  The port is made by an inlet of the sea, deep and narrow, where a
ship lay waiting to dispeople Sky, by carrying the natives away to
America.

In coasting Sky, we passed by the cavern in which it was the custom, as
Martin relates, to catch birds in the night, by making a fire at the
entrance.  This practice is disused; for the birds, as is known often to
happen, have changed their haunts.

Here we dined at a publick house, I believe the only inn of the island,
and having mounted our horses, travelled in the manner already described,
till we came to Kingsborough, a place distinguished by that name, because
the King lodged here when he landed at Port Re.  We were entertained with
the usual hospitality by Mr. Macdonald and his lady, Flora Macdonald, a
name that will be mentioned in history, and if courage and fidelity be
virtues, mentioned with honour.  She is a woman of middle stature, soft
features, gentle manners, and elegant presence.

In the morning we sent our horses round a promontory to meet us, and
spared ourselves part of the day's fatigue, by crossing an arm of the
sea.  We had at last some difficulty in coming to Dunvegan; for our way
led over an extensive moor, where every step was to be taken with
caution, and we were often obliged to alight, because the ground could
not be trusted.  In travelling this watery flat, I perceived that it had
a visible declivity, and might without much expence or difficulty be
drained.  But difficulty and expence are relative terms, which have
different meanings in different places.

To Dunvegan we came, very willing to be at rest, and found our fatigue
amply recompensed by our reception.  Lady Macleod, who had lived many
years in England, was newly come hither with her son and four daughters,
who knew all the arts of southern elegance, and all the modes of English
economy.  Here therefore we settled, and did not spoil the present hour
with thoughts of departure.

Dunvegan is a rocky prominence, that juts out into a bay, on the west
side of Sky.  The house, which is the principal seat of Macleod, is
partly old and partly modern; it is built upon the rock, and looks upon
the water.  It forms two sides of a small square: on the third side is
the skeleton of a castle of unknown antiquity, supposed to have been a
Norwegian fortress, when the Danes were masters of the Islands.  It is so
nearly entire, that it might have easily been made habitable, were there
not an ominous tradition in the family, that the owner shall not long
outlive the reparation.  The grandfather of the present Laird, in
defiance of prediction, began the work, but desisted in a little time,
and applied his money to worse uses.

As the inhabitants of the Hebrides lived, for many ages, in continual
expectation of hostilities, the chief of every clan resided in a
fortress.  This house was accessible only from the water, till the last
possessor opened an entrance by stairs upon the land.

They had formerly reason to be afraid, not only of declared wars and
authorized invaders, or of roving pirates, which, in the northern seas,
must have been very common; but of inroads and insults from rival clans,
who, in the plenitude of feudal independence, asked no leave of their
Sovereign to make war on one another.  Sky has been ravaged by a feud
between the two mighty powers of Macdonald and Macleod.  Macdonald having
married a Macleod upon some discontent dismissed her, perhaps because she
had brought him no children.  Before the reign of James the Fifth, a
Highland Laird made a trial of his wife for a certain time, and if she
did not please him, he was then at liberty to send her away.  This
however must always have offended, and Macleod resenting the injury,
whatever were its circumstances, declared, that the wedding had been
solemnized without a bonfire, but that the separation should be better
illuminated; and raising a little army, set fire to the territories of
Macdonald, who returned the visit, and prevailed.

Another story may show the disorderly state of insular neighbourhood.  The
inhabitants of the Isle of Egg, meeting a boat manned by Macleods, tied
the crew hand and foot, and set them a-drift.  Macleod landed upon Egg,
and demanded the offenders; but the inhabitants refusing to surrender
them, retreated to a cavern, into which they thought their enemies
unlikely to follow them.  Macleod choked them with smoke, and left them
lying dead by families as they stood.

Here the violence of the weather confined us for some time, not at all to
our discontent or inconvenience.  We would indeed very willingly have
visited the Islands, which might be seen from the house scattered in the
sea, and I was particularly desirous to have viewed Isay; but the storms
did not permit us to launch a boat, and we were condemned to listen in
idleness to the wind, except when we were better engaged by listening to
the ladies.

We had here more wind than waves, and suffered the severity of a tempest,
without enjoying its magnificence.  The sea being broken by the multitude
of islands, does not roar with so much noise, nor beat the shore with
such foamy violence, as I have remarked on the coast of Sussex.  Though,
while I was in the Hebrides, the wind was extremely turbulent, I never
saw very high billows.

The country about Dunvegan is rough and barren.  There are no trees,
except in the orchard, which is a low sheltered spot surrounded with a
wall.

When this house was intended to sustain a siege, a well was made in the
court, by boring the rock downwards, till water was found, which though
so near to the sea, I have not heard mentioned as brackish, though it has
some hardness, or other qualities, which make it less fit for use; and
the family is now better supplied from a stream, which runs by the rock,
from two pleasing waterfalls.

Here we saw some traces of former manners, and heard some standing
traditions.  In the house is kept an ox's horn, hollowed so as to hold
perhaps two quarts, which the heir of Macleod was expected to swallow at
one draught, as a test of his manhood, before he was permitted to bear
arms, or could claim a seat among the men.  It is held that the return of
the Laird to Dunvegan, after any considerable absence, produces a
plentiful capture of herrings; and that, if any woman crosses the water
to the opposite Island, the herrings will desert the coast.  Boetius
tells the same of some other place.  This tradition is not uniform.  Some
hold that no woman may pass, and others that none may pass but a Macleod.

Among other guests, which the hospitality of Dunvegan brought to the
table, a visit was paid by the Laird and Lady of a small island south of
Sky, of which the proper name is Muack, which signifies swine.  It is
commonly called Muck, which the proprietor not liking, has endeavoured,
without effect, to change to Monk.  It is usual to call gentlemen in
Scotland by the name of their possessions, as Raasay, Bernera, Loch Buy,
a practice necessary in countries inhabited by clans, where all that live
in the same territory have one name, and must be therefore discriminated
by some addition.  This gentleman, whose name, I think, is Maclean,
should be regularly called Muck; but the appellation, which he thinks too
coarse for his Island, he would like still less for himself, and he is
therefore addressed by the title of, Isle of Muck.

This little Island, however it be named, is of considerable value.  It is
two English miles long, and three quarters of a mile broad, and
consequently contains only nine hundred and sixty English acres.  It is
chiefly arable.  Half of this little dominion the Laird retains in his
own hand, and on the other half, live one hundred and sixty persons, who
pay their rent by exported corn.  What rent they pay, we were not told,
and could not decently inquire.  The proportion of the people to the land
is such, as the most fertile countries do not commonly maintain.

The Laird having all his people under his immediate view, seems to be
very attentive to their happiness.  The devastation of the small-pox,
when it visits places where it comes seldom, is well known.  He has
disarmed it of its terrour at Muack, by inoculating eighty of his people.
The expence was two shillings and sixpence a head.  Many trades they
cannot have among them, but upon occasion, he fetches a smith from the
Isle of Egg, and has a tailor from the main land, six times a year.  This
island well deserved to be seen, but the Laird's absence left us no
opportunity.

Every inhabited island has its appendant and subordinate islets.  Muck,
however small, has yet others smaller about it, one of which has only
ground sufficient to afford pasture for three wethers.

At Dunvegan I had tasted lotus, and was in danger of forgetting that I
was ever to depart, till Mr. Boswell sagely reproached me with my
sluggishness and softness.  I had no very forcible defence to make; and
we agreed to pursue our journey.  Macleod accompanied us to Ulinish,
where we were entertained by the sheriff of the Island.




ULINISH


Mr. Macqueen travelled with us, and directed our attention to all that
was worthy of observation.  With him we went to see an ancient building,
called a dun or borough.  It was a circular inclosure, about forty-two
feet in diameter, walled round with loose stones, perhaps to the height
of nine feet.  The walls were very thick, diminishing a little toward the
top, and though in these countries, stone is not brought far, must have
been raised with much labour.  Within the great circle were several
smaller rounds of wall, which formed distinct apartments.  Its date, and
its use are unknown.  Some suppose it the original seat of the chiefs of
the Macleods.  Mr. Macqueen thought it a Danish fort.

The entrance is covered with flat stones, and is narrow, because it was
necessary that the stones which lie over it, should reach from one wall
to the other; yet, strait as the passage is, they seem heavier than could
have been placed where they now lie, by the naked strength of as many men
as might stand about them.  They were probably raised by putting long
pieces of wood under them, to which the action of a long line of lifters
might be applied.  Savages, in all countries, have patience proportionate
to their unskilfulness, and are content to attain their end by very
tedious methods.

If it was ever roofed, it might once have been a dwelling, but as there
is no provision for water, it could not have been a fortress.  In Sky, as
in every other place, there is an ambition of exalting whatever has
survived memory, to some important use, and referring it to very remote
ages.  I am inclined to suspect, that in lawless times, when the
inhabitants of every mountain stole the cattle of their neighbour, these
inclosures were used to secure the herds and flocks in the night.  When
they were driven within the wall, they might be easily watched, and
defended as long as could be needful; for the robbers durst not wait till
the injured clan should find them in the morning.

The interior inclosures, if the whole building were once a house, were
the chambers of the chief inhabitants.  If it was a place of security for
cattle, they were probably the shelters of the keepers.

From the Dun we were conducted to another place of security, a cave
carried a great way under ground, which had been discovered by digging
after a fox.  These caves, of which many have been found, and many
probably remain concealed, are formed, I believe, commonly by taking
advantage of a hollow, where banks or rocks rise on either side.  If no
such place can be found, the ground must be cut away.  The walls are made
by piling stones against the earth, on either side.  It is then roofed by
larger stones laid across the cavern, which therefore cannot be wide.
Over the roof, turfs were placed, and grass was suffered to grow; and the
mouth was concealed by bushes, or some other cover.

These caves were represented to us as the cabins of the first rude
inhabitants, of which, however, I am by no means persuaded.  This was so
low, that no man could stand upright in it.  By their construction they
are all so narrow, that two can never pass along them together, and being
subterraneous, they must be always damp.  They are not the work of an age
much ruder than the present; for they are formed with as much art as the
construction of a common hut requires.  I imagine them to have been
places only of occasional use, in which the Islander, upon a sudden
alarm, hid his utensils, or his cloaths, and perhaps sometimes his wife
and children.

This cave we entered, but could not proceed the whole length, and went
away without knowing how far it was carried.  For this omission we shall
be blamed, as we perhaps have blamed other travellers; but the day was
rainy, and the ground was damp.  We had with us neither spades nor
pickaxes, and if love of ease surmounted our desire of knowledge, the
offence has not the invidiousness of singularity.

Edifices, either standing or ruined, are the chief records of an
illiterate nation.  In some part of this journey, at no great distance
from our way, stood a shattered fortress, of which the learned minister,
to whose communication we are much indebted, gave us an account.

Those, said he, are the walls of a place of refuge, built in the time of
James the Sixth, by Hugh Macdonald, who was next heir to the dignity and
fortune of his chief.  Hugh, being so near his wish, was impatient of
delay; and had art and influence sufficient to engage several gentlemen
in a plot against the Laird's life.  Something must be stipulated on both
sides; for they would not dip their hands in blood merely for Hugh's
advancement.  The compact was formerly written, signed by the
conspirators, and placed in the hands of one Macleod.

It happened that Macleod had sold some cattle to a drover, who, not
having ready money, gave him a bond for payment.  The debt was
discharged, and the bond re-demanded; which Macleod, who could not read,
intending to put into his hands, gave him the conspiracy.  The drover,
when he had read the paper, delivered it privately to Macdonald; who,
being thus informed of his danger, called his friends together, and
provided for his safety.  He made a public feast, and inviting Hugh
Macdonald and his confederates, placed each of them at the table between
two men of known fidelity.  The compact of conspiracy was then shewn, and
every man confronted with his own name.  Macdonald acted with great
moderation.  He upbraided Hugh, both with disloyalty and ingratitude; but
told the rest, that he considered them as men deluded and misinformed.
Hugh was sworn to fidelity, and dismissed with his companions; but he was
not generous enough to be reclaimed by lenity; and finding no longer any
countenance among the gentlemen, endeavoured to execute the same design
by meaner hands.  In this practice he was detected, taken to Macdonald's
castle, and imprisoned in the dungeon.  When he was hungry, they let down
a plentiful meal of salted meat; and when, after his repast, he called
for drink, conveyed to him a covered cup, which, when he lifted the lid,
he found empty.  From that time they visited him no more, but left him to
perish in solitude and darkness.

We were then told of a cavern by the sea-side, remarkable for the
powerful reverberation of sounds.  After dinner we took a boat, to
explore this curious cavity.  The boatmen, who seemed to be of a rank
above that of common drudges, inquired who the strangers were, and being
told we came one from Scotland, and the other from England, asked if the
Englishman could recount a long genealogy.  What answer was given them,
the conversation being in Erse, I was not much inclined to examine.

They expected no good event of the voyage; for one of them declared that
he heard the cry of an English ghost.  This omen I was not told till
after our return, and therefore cannot claim the dignity of despising it.

The sea was smooth.  We never left the shore, and came without any
disaster to the cavern, which we found rugged and misshapen, about one
hundred and eighty feet long, thirty wide in the broadest part, and in
the loftiest, as we guessed, about thirty high.  It was now dry, but at
high water the sea rises in it near six feet.  Here I saw what I had
never seen before, limpets and mussels in their natural state.  But, as a
new testimony to the veracity of common fame, here was no echo to be
heard.

We then walked through a natural arch in the rock, which might have
pleased us by its novelty, had the stones, which incumbered our feet,
given us leisure to consider it.  We were shown the gummy seed of the
kelp, that fastens itself to a stone, from which it grows into a strong
stalk.

In our return, we found a little boy upon the point of rock, catching
with his angle, a supper for the family.  We rowed up to him, and
borrowed his rod, with which Mr. Boswell caught a cuddy.

The cuddy is a fish of which I know not the philosophical name.  It is
not much bigger than a gudgeon, but is of great use in these Islands, as
it affords the lower people both food, and oil for their lamps.  Cuddies
are so abundant, at sometimes of the year, that they are caught like
whitebait in the Thames, only by dipping a basket and drawing it back.

If it were always practicable to fish, these Islands could never be in
much danger from famine; but unhappily in the winter, when other
provision fails, the seas are commonly too rough for nets, or boats.




TALISKER IN SKY


From Ulinish, our next stage was to Talisker, the house of colonel
Macleod, an officer in the Dutch service, who, in this time of universal
peace, has for several years been permitted to be absent from his
regiment.  Having been bred to physick, he is consequently a scholar, and
his lady, by accompanying him in his different places of residence, is
become skilful in several languages.  Talisker is the place beyond all
that I have seen, from which the gay and the jovial seem utterly
excluded; and where the hermit might expect to grow old in meditation,
without possibility of disturbance or interruption.  It is situated very
near the sea, but upon a coast where no vessel lands but when it is
driven by a tempest on the rocks.  Towards the land are lofty hills
streaming with waterfalls.  The garden is sheltered by firs or pines,
which grow there so prosperously, that some, which the present inhabitant
planted, are very high and thick.

At this place we very happily met Mr. Donald Maclean, a young gentleman,
the eldest son of the Laird of Col, heir to a very great extent of land,
and so desirous of improving his inheritance, that he spent a
considerable time among the farmers of Hertfordshire, and Hampshire, to
learn their practice.  He worked with his own hands at the principal
operations of agriculture, that he might not deceive himself by a false
opinion of skill, which, if he should find it deficient at home, he had
no means of completing.  If the world has agreed to praise the travels
and manual labours of the Czar of Muscovy, let Col have his share of the
like applause, in the proportion of his dominions to the empire of
Russia.

This young gentleman was sporting in the mountains of Sky, and when he
was weary with following his game, repaired for lodging to Talisker.  At
night he missed one of his dogs, and when he went to seek him in the
morning, found two eagles feeding on his carcass.

Col, for he must be named by his possessions, hearing that our intention
was to visit Jona, offered to conduct us to his chief, Sir Allan Maclean,
who lived in the isle of Inch Kenneth, and would readily find us a
convenient passage.  From this time was formed an acquaintance, which
being begun by kindness, was accidentally continued by constraint; we
derived much pleasure from it, and I hope have given him no reason to
repent it.

The weather was now almost one continued storm, and we were to snatch
some happy intermission to be conveyed to Mull, the third Island of the
Hebrides, lying about a degree south of Sky, whence we might easily find
our way to Inch Kenneth, where Sir Allan Maclean resided, and afterward
to Jona.

For this purpose, the most commodious station that we could take was
Armidel, which Sir Alexander Macdonald had now left to a gentleman, who
lived there as his factor or steward.

In our way to Armidel was Coriatachan, where we had already been, and to
which therefore we were very willing to return.  We staid however so long
at Talisker, that a great part of our journey was performed in the gloom
of the evening.  In travelling even thus almost without light thro' naked
solitude, when there is a guide whose conduct may be trusted, a mind not
naturally too much disposed to fear, may preserve some degree of
cheerfulness; but what must be the solicitude of him who should be
wandering, among the craggs and hollows, benighted, ignorant, and alone?

The fictions of the Gothick romances were not so remote from credibility
as they are now thought.  In the full prevalence of the feudal
institution, when violence desolated the world, and every baron lived in
a fortress, forests and castles were regularly succeeded by each other,
and the adventurer might very suddenly pass from the gloom of woods, or
the ruggedness of moors, to seats of plenty, gaiety, and magnificence.
Whatever is imaged in the wildest tale, if giants, dragons, and
enchantment be excepted, would be felt by him, who, wandering in the
mountains without a guide, or upon the sea without a pilot, should be
carried amidst his terror and uncertainty, to the hospitality and
elegance of Raasay or Dunvegan.

To Coriatachan at last we came, and found ourselves welcomed as before.
Here we staid two days, and made such inquiries as curiosity suggested.
The house was filled with company, among whom Mr. Macpherson and his
sister distinguished themselves by their politeness and accomplishments.
By him we were invited to Ostig, a house not far from Armidel, where we
might easily hear of a boat, when the weather would suffer us to leave
the Island.




OSTIG IN SKY


At Ostig, of which Mr. Macpherson is minister, we were entertained for
some days, then removed to Armidel, where we finished our observations on
the island of Sky.

As this Island lies in the fifty-seventh degree, the air cannot be
supposed to have much warmth.  The long continuance of the sun above the
horizon, does indeed sometimes produce great heat in northern latitudes;
but this can only happen in sheltered places, where the atmosphere is to
a certain degree stagnant, and the same mass of air continues to receive
for many hours the rays of the sun, and the vapours of the earth.  Sky
lies open on the west and north to a vast extent of ocean, and is cooled
in the summer by perpetual ventilation, but by the same blasts is kept
warm in winter.  Their weather is not pleasing.  Half the year is deluged
with rain.  From the autumnal to the vernal equinox, a dry day is hardly
known, except when the showers are suspended by a tempest.  Under such
skies can be expected no great exuberance of vegetation.  Their winter
overtakes their summer, and their harvest lies upon the ground drenched
with rain.  The autumn struggles hard to produce some of our early
fruits.  I gathered gooseberries in September; but they were small, and
the husk was thick.

Their winter is seldom such as puts a full stop to the growth of plants,
or reduces the cattle to live wholly on the surplusage of the summer.  In
the year Seventy-one they had a severe season, remembered by the name of
the Black Spring, from which the island has not yet recovered.  The snow
lay long upon the ground, a calamity hardly known before.  Part of their
cattle died for want, part were unseasonably sold to buy sustenance for
the owners; and, what I have not read or heard of before, the kine that
survived were so emaciated and dispirited, that they did not require the
male at the usual time.  Many of the roebucks perished.

The soil, as in other countries, has its diversities.  In some parts
there is only a thin layer of earth spread upon a rock, which bears
nothing but short brown heath, and perhaps is not generally capable of
any better product.  There are many bogs or mosses of greater or less
extent, where the soil cannot be supposed to want depth, though it is too
wet for the plow.  But we did not observe in these any aquatick plants.
The vallies and the mountains are alike darkened with heath.  Some grass,
however, grows here and there, and some happier spots of earth are
capable of tillage.

Their agriculture is laborious, and perhaps rather feeble than unskilful.
Their chief manure is seaweed, which, when they lay it to rot upon the
field, gives them a better crop than those of the Highlands.  They heap
sea shells upon the dunghill, which in time moulder into a fertilising
substance.  When they find a vein of earth where they cannot use it, they
dig it up, and add it to the mould of a more commodious place.

Their corn grounds often lie in such intricacies among the craggs, that
there is no room for the action of a team and plow.  The soil is then
turned up by manual labour, with an instrument called a crooked spade, of
a form and weight which to me appeared very incommodious, and would
perhaps be soon improved in a country where workmen could be easily found
and easily paid.  It has a narrow blade of iron fixed to a long and heavy
piece of wood, which must have, about a foot and a half above the iron, a
knee or flexure with the angle downwards.  When the farmer encounters a
stone which is the great impediment of his operations, he drives the
blade under it, and bringing the knee or angle to the ground, has in the
long handle a very forcible lever.

According to the different mode of tillage, farms are distinguished into
long land and short land.  Long land is that which affords room for a
plow, and short land is turned up by the spade.

The grain which they commit to the furrows thus tediously formed, is
either oats or barley.  They do not sow barley without very copious
manure, and then they expect from it ten for one, an increase equal to
that of better countries; but the culture is so operose that they content
themselves commonly with oats; and who can relate without compassion,
that after all their diligence they are to expect only a triple increase?
It is in vain to hope for plenty, when a third part of the harvest must
be reserved for seed.

When their grain is arrived at the state which they must consider as
ripeness, they do not cut, but pull the barley: to the oats they apply
the sickle.  Wheel carriages they have none, but make a frame of timber,
which is drawn by one horse with the two points behind pressing on the
ground.  On this they sometimes drag home their sheaves, but often convey
them home in a kind of open panier, or frame of sticks upon the horse's
back.

Of that which is obtained with so much difficulty, nothing surely ought
to be wasted; yet their method of clearing their oats from the husk is by
parching them in the straw.  Thus with the genuine improvidence of
savages, they destroy that fodder for want of which their cattle may
perish.  From this practice they have two petty conveniences.  They dry
the grain so that it is easily reduced to meal, and they escape the theft
of the thresher.  The taste contracted from the fire by the oats, as by
every other scorched substance, use must long ago have made grateful.  The
oats that are not parched must be dried in a kiln.

The barns of Sky I never saw.  That which Macleod of Raasay had erected
near his house was so contrived, because the harvest is seldom brought
home dry, as by perpetual perflation to prevent the mow from heating.

Of their gardens I can judge only from their tables.  I did not observe
that the common greens were wanting, and suppose, that by choosing an
advantageous exposition, they can raise all the more hardy esculent
plants.  Of vegetable fragrance or beauty they are not yet studious.  Few
vows are made to Flora in the Hebrides.

They gather a little hay, but the grass is mown late; and is so often
almost dry and again very wet, before it is housed, that it becomes a
collection of withered stalks without taste or fragrance; it must be
eaten by cattle that have nothing else, but by most English farmers would
be thrown away.

In the Islands I have not heard that any subterraneous treasures have
been discovered, though where there are mountains, there are commonly
minerals.  One of the rocks in Col has a black vein, imagined to consist
of the ore of lead; but it was never yet opened or essayed.  In Sky a
black mass was accidentally picked up, and brought into the house of the
owner of the land, who found himself strongly inclined to think it a
coal, but unhappily it did not burn in the chimney.  Common ores would be
here of no great value; for what requires to be separated by fire, must,
if it were found, be carried away in its mineral state, here being no
fewel for the smelting-house or forge.  Perhaps by diligent search in
this world of stone, some valuable species of marble might be discovered.
But neither philosophical curiosity, nor commercial industry, have yet
fixed their abode here, where the importunity of immediate want supplied
but for the day, and craving on the morrow, has left little room for
excursive knowledge or the pleasing fancies of distant profit.

They have lately found a manufacture considerably lucrative.  Their rocks
abound with kelp, a sea-plant, of which the ashes are melted into glass.
They burn kelp in great quantities, and then send it away in ships, which
come regularly to purchase them.  This new source of riches has raised
the rents of many maritime farms; but the tenants pay, like all other
tenants, the additional rent with great unwillingness; because they
consider the profits of the kelp as the mere product of personal labour,
to which the landlord contributes nothing.  However, as any man may be
said to give, what he gives the power of gaining, he has certainly as
much right to profit from the price of kelp as of any thing else found or
raised upon his ground.

This new trade has excited a long and eager litigation between Macdonald
and Macleod, for a ledge of rocks, which, till the value of kelp was
known, neither of them desired the reputation of possessing.

The cattle of Sky are not so small as is commonly believed.  Since they
have sent their beeves in great numbers to southern marts, they have
probably taken more care of their breed.  At stated times the annual
growth of cattle is driven to a fair, by a general drover, and with the
money, which he returns to the farmer, the rents are paid.

The price regularly expected, is from two to three pounds a head: there
was once one sold for five pounds.  They go from the Islands very lean,
and are not offered to the butcher, till they have been long fatted in
English pastures.

Of their black cattle, some are without horns, called by the Scots humble
cows, as we call a bee an humble bee, that wants a sting.  Whether this
difference be specifick, or accidental, though we inquired with great
diligence, we could not be informed.  We are not very sure that the bull
is ever without horns, though we have been told, that such bulls there
are.  What is produced by putting a horned and unhorned male and female
together, no man has ever tried, that thought the result worthy of
observation.

Their horses are, like their cows, of a moderate size.  I had no
difficulty to mount myself commodiously by the favour of the gentlemen.  I
heard of very little cows in Barra, and very little horses in Rum, where
perhaps no care is taken to prevent that diminution of size, which must
always happen, where the greater and the less copulate promiscuously, and
the young animal is restrained from growth by penury of sustenance.

The goat is the general inhabitant of the earth, complying with every
difference of climate, and of soil.  The goats of the Hebrides are like
others: nor did I hear any thing of their sheep, to be particularly
remarked.

In the penury of these malignant regions, nothing is left that can be
converted to food.  The goats and the sheep are milked like the cows.  A
single meal of a goat is a quart, and of a sheep a pint.  Such at least
was the account, which I could extract from those of whom I am not sure
that they ever had inquired.

The milk of goats is much thinner than that of cows, and that of sheep is
much thicker.  Sheeps milk is never eaten before it is boiled: as it is
thick, it must be very liberal of curd, and the people of St. Kilda form
it into small cheeses.

The stags of the mountains are less than those of our parks, or forests,
perhaps not bigger than our fallow deer.  Their flesh has no rankness,
nor is inferiour in flavour to our common venison.  The roebuck I neither
saw nor tasted.  These are not countries for a regular chase.  The deer
are not driven with horns and hounds.  A sportsman, with his gun in his
hand, watches the animal, and when he has wounded him, traces him by the
blood.

They have a race of brinded greyhounds, larger and stronger than those
with which we course hares, and those are the only dogs used by them for
the chase.

Man is by the use of fire-arms made so much an overmatch for other
animals, that in all countries, where they are in use, the wild part of
the creation sensibly diminishes.  There will probably not be long,
either stags or roebucks in the Islands.  All the beasts of chase would
have been lost long ago in countries well inhabited, had they not been
preserved by laws for the pleasure of the rich.

There are in Sky neither rats nor mice, but the weasel is so frequent,
that he is heard in houses rattling behind chests or beds, as rats in
England.  They probably owe to his predominance that they have no other
vermin; for since the great rat took possession of this part of the
world, scarce a ship can touch at any port, but some of his race are left
behind.  They have within these few years began to infest the isle of
Col, where being left by some trading vessel, they have increased for
want of weasels to oppose them.

The inhabitants of Sky, and of the other Islands, which I have seen, are
commonly of the middle stature, with fewer among them very tall or very
short, than are seen in England, or perhaps, as their numbers are small,
the chances of any deviation from the common measure are necessarily few.
The tallest men that I saw are among those of higher rank.  In regions of
barrenness and scarcity, the human race is hindered in its growth by the
same causes as other animals.

The ladies have as much beauty here as in other places, but bloom and
softness are not to be expected among the lower classes, whose faces are
exposed to the rudeness of the climate, and whose features are sometimes
contracted by want, and sometimes hardened by the blasts.  Supreme beauty
is seldom found in cottages or work-shops, even where no real hardships
are suffered.  To expand the human face to its full perfection, it seems
necessary that the mind should co-operate by placidness of content, or
consciousness of superiority.

Their strength is proportionate to their size, but they are accustomed to
run upon rough ground, and therefore can with great agility skip over the
bog, or clamber the mountain.  For a campaign in the wastes of America,
soldiers better qualified could not have been found.  Having little work
to do, they are not willing, nor perhaps able to endure a long
continuance of manual labour, and are therefore considered as habitually
idle.

Having never been supplied with those accommodations, which life
extensively diversified with trades affords, they supply their wants by
very insufficient shifts, and endure many inconveniences, which a little
attention would easily relieve.  I have seen a horse carrying home the
harvest on a crate.  Under his tail was a stick for a crupper, held at
the two ends by twists of straw.  Hemp will grow in their islands, and
therefore ropes may be had.  If they wanted hemp, they might make better
cordage of rushes, or perhaps of nettles, than of straw.

Their method of life neither secures them perpetual health, nor exposes
them to any particular diseases.  There are physicians in the Islands,
who, I believe, all practise chirurgery, and all compound their own
medicines.

It is generally supposed, that life is longer in places where there are
few opportunities of luxury; but I found no instance here of
extraordinary longevity.  A cottager grows old over his oaten cakes, like
a citizen at a turtle feast.  He is indeed seldom incommoded by
corpulence.  Poverty preserves him from sinking under the burden of
himself, but he escapes no other injury of time.  Instances of long life
are often related, which those who hear them are more willing to credit
than examine.  To be told that any man has attained a hundred years,
gives hope and comfort to him who stands trembling on the brink of his
own climacterick.

Length of life is distributed impartially to very different modes of life
in very different climates; and the mountains have no greater examples of
age and health than the low lands, where I was introduced to two ladies
of high quality; one of whom, in her ninety-fourth year, presided at her
table with the full exercise of all her powers; and the other has
attained her eighty-fourth, without any diminution of her vivacity, and
with little reason to accuse time of depredations on her beauty.

In the Islands, as in most other places, the inhabitants are of different
rank, and one does not encroach here upon another.  Where there is no
commerce nor manufacture, he that is born poor can scarcely become rich;
and if none are able to buy estates, he that is born to land cannot
annihilate his family by selling it.  This was once the state of these
countries.  Perhaps there is no example, till within a century and half,
of any family whose estate was alienated otherwise than by violence or
forfeiture.  Since money has been brought amongst them, they have found,
like others, the art of spending more than they receive; and I saw with
grief the chief of a very ancient clan, whose Island was condemned by law
to be sold for the satisfaction of his creditors.

The name of highest dignity is Laird, of which there are in the extensive
Isle of Sky only three, Macdonald, Macleod, and Mackinnon.  The Laird is
the original owner of the land, whose natural power must be very great,
where no man lives but by agriculture; and where the produce of the land
is not conveyed through the labyrinths of traffick, but passes directly
from the hand that gathers it to the mouth that eats it.  The Laird has
all those in his power that live upon his farms.  Kings can, for the most
part, only exalt or degrade.  The Laird at pleasure can feed or starve,
can give bread, or withold it.  This inherent power was yet strengthened
by the kindness of consanguinity, and the reverence of patriarchal
authority.  The Laird was the father of the Clan, and his tenants
commonly bore his name.  And to these principles of original command was
added, for many ages, an exclusive right of legal jurisdiction.

This multifarious, and extensive obligation operated with force scarcely
credible.  Every duty, moral or political, was absorbed in affection and
adherence to the Chief.  Not many years have passed since the clans knew
no law but the Laird's will.  He told them to whom they should be friends
or enemies, what King they should obey, and what religion they should
profess.

When the Scots first rose in arms against the succession of the house of
Hanover, Lovat, the Chief of the Frasers, was in exile for a rape.  The
Frasers were very numerous, and very zealous against the government.  A
pardon was sent to Lovat.  He came to the English camp, and the clan
immediately deserted to him.

Next in dignity to the Laird is the Tacksman; a large taker or
lease-holder of land, of which he keeps part, as a domain, in his own
hand, and lets part to under tenants.  The Tacksman is necessarily a man
capable of securing to the Laird the whole rent, and is commonly a
collateral relation.  These tacks, or subordinate possessions, were long
considered as hereditary, and the occupant was distinguished by the name
of the place at which he resided.  He held a middle station, by which the
highest and the lowest orders were connected.  He paid rent and reverence
to the Laird, and received them from the tenants.  This tenure still
subsists, with its original operation, but not with the primitive
stability.  Since the islanders, no longer content to live, have learned
the desire of growing rich, an ancient dependent is in danger of giving
way to a higher bidder, at the expense of domestick dignity and
hereditary power.  The stranger, whose money buys him preference,
considers himself as paying for all that he has, and is indifferent about
the Laird's honour or safety.  The commodiousness of money is indeed
great; but there are some advantages which money cannot buy, and which
therefore no wise man will by the love of money be tempted to forego.

I have found in the hither parts of Scotland, men not defective in
judgment or general experience, who consider the Tacksman as a useless
burden of the ground, as a drone who lives upon the product of an estate,
without the right of property, or the merit of labour, and who
impoverishes at once the landlord and the tenant.  The land, say they, is
let to the Tacksman at sixpence an acre, and by him to the tenant at ten-
pence.  Let the owner be the immediate landlord to all the tenants; if he
sets the ground at eight-pence, he will increase his revenue by a fourth
part, and the tenant's burthen will be diminished by a fifth.

Those who pursue this train of reasoning, seem not sufficiently to
inquire whither it will lead them, nor to know that it will equally shew
the propriety of suppressing all wholesale trade, of shutting up the
shops of every man who sells what he does not make, and of extruding all
whose agency and profit intervene between the manufacturer and the
consumer.  They may, by stretching their understandings a little wider,
comprehend, that all those who by undertaking large quantities of
manufacture, and affording employment to many labourers, make themselves
considered as benefactors to the publick, have only been robbing their
workmen with one hand, and their customers with the other.  If Crowley
had sold only what he could make, and all his smiths had wrought their
own iron with their own hammers, he would have lived on less, and they
would have sold their work for more.  The salaries of superintendents and
clerks would have been partly saved, and partly shared, and nails been
sometimes cheaper by a farthing in a hundred.  But then if the smith
could not have found an immediate purchaser, he must have deserted his
anvil; if there had by accident at any time been more sellers than
buyers, the workmen must have reduced their profit to nothing, by
underselling one another; and as no great stock could have been in any
hand, no sudden demand of large quantities could have been answered and
the builder must have stood still till the nailer could supply him.

According to these schemes, universal plenty is to begin and end in
universal misery.  Hope and emulation will be utterly extinguished; and
as all must obey the call of immediate necessity, nothing that requires
extensive views, or provides for distant consequences will ever be
performed.

To the southern inhabitants of Scotland, the state of the mountains and
the islands is equally unknown with that of Borneo or Sumatra: Of both
they have only heard a little, and guess the rest.  They are strangers to
the language and the manners, to the advantages and wants of the people,
whose life they would model, and whose evils they would remedy.

Nothing is less difficult than to procure one convenience by the
forfeiture of another.  A soldier may expedite his march by throwing away
his arms.  To banish the Tacksman is easy, to make a country plentiful by
diminishing the people, is an expeditious mode of husbandry; but little
abundance, which there is nobody to enjoy, contributes little to human
happiness.

As the mind must govern the hands, so in every society the man of
intelligence must direct the man of labour.  If the Tacksmen be taken
away, the Hebrides must in their present state be given up to grossness
and ignorance; the tenant, for want of instruction, will be unskilful,
and for want of admonition will be negligent.  The Laird in these wide
estates, which often consist of islands remote from one another, cannot
extend his personal influence to all his tenants; and the steward having
no dignity annexed to his character, can have little authority among men
taught to pay reverence only to birth, and who regard the Tacksman as
their hereditary superior; nor can the steward have equal zeal for the
prosperity of an estate profitable only to the Laird, with the Tacksman,
who has the Laird's income involved in his own.

The only gentlemen in the Islands are the Lairds, the Tacksmen, and the
Ministers, who frequently improve their livings by becoming farmers.  If
the Tacksmen be banished, who will be left to impart knowledge, or
impress civility?  The Laird must always be at a distance from the
greater part of his lands; and if he resides at all upon them, must drag
his days in solitude, having no longer either a friend or a companion; he
will therefore depart to some more comfortable residence, and leave the
tenants to the wisdom and mercy of a factor.

Of tenants there are different orders, as they have greater or less
stock.  Land is sometimes leased to a small fellowship, who live in a
cluster of huts, called a Tenants Town, and are bound jointly and
separately for the payment of their rent.  These, I believe, employ in
the care of their cattle, and the labour of tillage, a kind of tenants
yet lower; who having a hut with grass for a certain number of cows and
sheep, pay their rent by a stipulated quantity of labour.

The condition of domestick servants, or the price of occasional labour, I
do not know with certainty.  I was told that the maids have sheep, and
are allowed to spin for their own clothing; perhaps they have no
pecuniary wages, or none but in very wealthy families.  The state of
life, which has hitherto been purely pastoral, begins now to be a little
variegated with commerce; but novelties enter by degrees, and till one
mode has fully prevailed over the other, no settled notion can be formed.

Such is the system of insular subordination, which, having little
variety, cannot afford much delight in the view, nor long detain the mind
in contemplation.  The inhabitants were for a long time perhaps not
unhappy; but their content was a muddy mixture of pride and ignorance, an
indifference for pleasures which they did not know, a blind veneration
for their chiefs, and a strong conviction of their own importance.

Their pride has been crushed by the heavy hand of a vindictive conqueror,
whose seventies have been followed by laws, which, though they cannot be
called cruel, have produced much discontent, because they operate upon
the surface of life, and make every eye bear witness to subjection.  To
be compelled to a new dress has always been found painful.

Their Chiefs being now deprived of their jurisdiction, have already lost
much of their influence; and as they gradually degenerate from
patriarchal rulers to rapacious landlords, they will divest themselves of
the little that remains.

That dignity which they derived from an opinion of their military
importance, the law, which disarmed them, has abated.  An old gentleman,
delighting himself with the recollection of better days, related, that
forty years ago, a Chieftain walked out attended by ten or twelve
followers, with their arms rattling.  That animating rabble has now
ceased.  The Chief has lost his formidable retinue; and the Highlander
walks his heath unarmed and defenceless, with the peaceable submission of
a French peasant or English cottager.

Their ignorance grows every day less, but their knowledge is yet of
little other use than to shew them their wants.  They are now in the
period of education, and feel the uneasiness of discipline, without yet
perceiving the benefit of instruction.

The last law, by which the Highlanders are deprived of their arms, has
operated with efficacy beyond expectation.  Of former statutes made with
the same design, the execution had been feeble, and the effect
inconsiderable.  Concealment was undoubtedly practised, and perhaps often
with connivance.  There was tenderness, or partiality, on one side, and
obstinacy on the other.  But the law, which followed the victory of
Culloden, found the whole nation dejected and intimidated; informations
were given without danger, and without fear, and the arms were collected
with such rigour, that every house was despoiled of its defence.

To disarm part of the Highlands, could give no reasonable occasion of
complaint.  Every government must be allowed the power of taking away the
weapon that is lifted against it.  But the loyal clans murmured, with
some appearance of justice, that after having defended the King, they
were forbidden for the future to defend themselves; and that the sword
should be forfeited, which had been legally employed.  Their case is
undoubtedly hard, but in political regulations, good cannot be complete,
it can only be predominant.

Whether by disarming a people thus broken into several tribes, and thus
remote from the seat of power, more good than evil has been produced, may
deserve inquiry.  The supreme power in every community has the right of
debarring every individual, and every subordinate society from
self-defence, only because the supreme power is able to defend them; and
therefore where the governor cannot act, he must trust the subject to act
for himself.  These Islands might be wasted with fire and sword before
their sovereign would know their distress.  A gang of robbers, such as
has been lately found confederating themselves in the Highlands, might
lay a wide region under contribution.  The crew of a petty privateer
might land on the largest and most wealthy of the Islands, and riot
without control in cruelty and waste.  It was observed by one of the
Chiefs of Sky, that fifty armed men might, without resistance ravage the
country.  Laws that place the subjects in such a state, contravene the
first principles of the compact of authority: they exact obedience, and
yield no protection.

It affords a generous and manly pleasure to conceive a little nation
gathering its fruits and tending its herds with fearless confidence,
though it lies open on every side to invasion, where, in contempt of
walls and trenches, every man sleeps securely with his sword beside him;
where all on the first approach of hostility came together at the call to
battle, as at a summons to a festal show; and committing their cattle to
the care of those whom age or nature has disabled, engage the enemy with
that competition for hazard and for glory, which operate in men that
fight under the eye of those, whose dislike or kindness they have always
considered as the greatest evil or the greatest good.

This was, in the beginning of the present century, the state of the
Highlands.  Every man was a soldier, who partook of national confidence,
and interested himself in national honour.  To lose this spirit, is to
lose what no small advantage will compensate.

It may likewise deserve to be inquired, whether a great nation ought to
be totally commercial? whether amidst the uncertainty of human affairs,
too much attention to one mode of happiness may not endanger others?
whether the pride of riches must not sometimes have recourse to the
protection of courage? and whether, if it be necessary to preserve in
some part of the empire the military spirit, it can subsist more
commodiously in any place, than in remote and unprofitable provinces,
where it can commonly do little harm, and whence it may be called forth
at any sudden exigence?

It must however be confessed, that a man, who places honour only in
successful violence, is a very troublesome and pernicious animal in time
of peace; and that the martial character cannot prevail in a whole
people, but by the diminution of all other virtues.  He that is
accustomed to resolve all right into conquest, will have very little
tenderness or equity.  All the friendship in such a life can be only a
confederacy of invasion, or alliance of defence.  The strong must
flourish by force, and the weak subsist by stratagem.

Till the Highlanders lost their ferocity, with their arms, they suffered
from each other all that malignity could dictate, or precipitance could
act.  Every provocation was revenged with blood, and no man that ventured
into a numerous company, by whatever occasion brought together, was sure
of returning without a wound.  If they are now exposed to foreign
hostilities, they may talk of the danger, but can seldom feel it.  If
they are no longer martial, they are no longer quarrelsome.  Misery is
caused for the most part, not by a heavy crush of disaster, but by the
corrosion of less visible evils, which canker enjoyment, and undermine
security.  The visit of an invader is necessarily rare, but domestick
animosities allow no cessation.

The abolition of the local jurisdictions, which had for so many ages been
exercised by the chiefs, has likewise its evil and its good.  The feudal
constitution naturally diffused itself into long ramifications of
subordinate authority.  To this general temper of the government was
added the peculiar form of the country, broken by mountains into many
subdivisions scarcely accessible but to the natives, and guarded by
passes, or perplexed with intricacies, through which national justice
could not find its way.

The power of deciding controversies, and of punishing offences, as some
such power there must always be, was intrusted to the Lairds of the
country, to those whom the people considered as their natural judges.  It
cannot be supposed that a rugged proprietor of the rocks, unprincipled
and unenlightened, was a nice resolver of entangled claims, or very exact
in proportioning punishment to offences.  But the more he indulged his
own will, the more he held his vassals in dependence.  Prudence and
innocence, without the favour of the Chief, conferred no security; and
crimes involved no danger, when the judge was resolute to acquit.

When the chiefs were men of knowledge and virtue, the convenience of a
domestick judicature was great.  No long journies were necessary, nor
artificial delays could be practised; the character, the alliances, and
interests of the litigants were known to the court, and all false
pretences were easily detected.  The sentence, when it was past, could
not be evaded; the power of the Laird superseded formalities, and justice
could not be defeated by interest or stratagem.

I doubt not but that since the regular judges have made their circuits
through the whole country, right has been every where more wisely, and
more equally distributed; the complaint is, that litigation is grown
troublesome, and that the magistrates are too few, and therefore often
too remote for general convenience.

Many of the smaller Islands have no legal officer within them.  I once
asked, If a crime should be committed, by what authority the offender
could be seized? and was told, that the Laird would exert his right; a
right which he must now usurp, but which surely necessity must vindicate,
and which is therefore yet exercised in lower degrees, by some of the
proprietors, when legal processes cannot be obtained.

In all greater questions, however, there is now happily an end to all
fear or hope from malice or from favour.  The roads are secure in those
places through which, forty years ago, no traveller could pass without a
convoy.  All trials of right by the sword are forgotten, and the mean are
in as little danger from the powerful as in other places.  No scheme of
policy has, in any country, yet brought the rich and poor on equal terms
into courts of judicature.  Perhaps experience, improving on experience,
may in time effect it.

Those who have long enjoyed dignity and power, ought not to lose it
without some equivalent.  There was paid to the Chiefs by the publick, in
exchange for their privileges, perhaps a sum greater than most of them
had ever possessed, which excited a thirst for riches, of which it shewed
them the use.  When the power of birth and station ceases, no hope
remains but from the prevalence of money.  Power and wealth supply the
place of each other.  Power confers the ability of gratifying our desire
without the consent of others.  Wealth enables us to obtain the consent
of others to our gratification.  Power, simply considered, whatever it
confers on one, must take from another.  Wealth enables its owner to give
to others, by taking only from himself.  Power pleases the violent and
proud: wealth delights the placid and the timorous.  Youth therefore
flies at power, and age grovels after riches.

The Chiefs, divested of their prerogatives, necessarily turned their
thoughts to the improvement of their revenues, and expect more rent, as
they have less homage.  The tenant, who is far from perceiving that his
condition is made better in the same proportion, as that of his landlord
is made worse, does not immediately see why his industry is to be taxed
more heavily than before.  He refuses to pay the demand, and is ejected;
the ground is then let to a stranger, who perhaps brings a larger stock,
but who, taking the land at its full price, treats with the Laird upon
equal terms, and considers him not as a Chief, but as a trafficker in
land.  Thus the estate perhaps is improved, but the clan is broken.

It seems to be the general opinion, that the rents have been raised with
too much eagerness.  Some regard must be paid to prejudice.  Those who
have hitherto paid but little, will not suddenly be persuaded to pay
much, though they can afford it.  As ground is gradually improved, and
the value of money decreases, the rent may be raised without any
diminution of the farmer's profits: yet it is necessary in these
countries, where the ejection of a tenant is a greater evil, than in more
populous places, to consider not merely what the land will produce, but
with what ability the inhabitant can cultivate it.  A certain stock can
allow but a certain payment; for if the land be doubled, and the stock
remains the same, the tenant becomes no richer.  The proprietors of the
Highlands might perhaps often increase their income, by subdividing the
farms, and allotting to every occupier only so many acres as he can
profitably employ, but that they want people.

There seems now, whatever be the cause, to be through a great part of the
Highlands a general discontent.  That adherence, which was lately
professed by every man to the chief of his name, has now little
prevalence; and he that cannot live as he desires at home, listens to the
tale of fortunate islands, and happy regions, where every man may have
land of his own, and eat the product of his labour without a superior.

Those who have obtained grants of American lands, have, as is well known,
invited settlers from all quarters of the globe; and among other places,
where oppression might produce a wish for new habitations, their
emissaries would not fail to try their persuasions in the Isles of
Scotland, where at the time when the clans were newly disunited from
their Chiefs, and exasperated by unprecedented exactions, it is no wonder
that they prevailed.

Whether the mischiefs of emigration were immediately perceived, may be
justly questioned.  They who went first, were probably such as could best
be spared; but the accounts sent by the earliest adventurers, whether
true or false, inclined many to follow them; and whole neighbourhoods
formed parties for removal; so that departure from their native country
is no longer exile.  He that goes thus accompanied, carries with him all
that makes life pleasant.  He sits down in a better climate, surrounded
by his kindred and his friends: they carry with them their language,
their opinions, their popular songs, and hereditary merriment: they
change nothing but the place of their abode; and of that change they
perceive the benefit.

This is the real effect of emigration, if those that go away together
settle on the same spot, and preserve their ancient union.  But some
relate that these adventurous visitants of unknown regions, after a
voyage passed in dreams of plenty and felicity, are dispersed at last
upon a Sylvan wilderness, where their first years must be spent in toil,
to clear the ground which is afterwards to be tilled, and that the whole
effect of their undertakings is only more fatigue and equal scarcity.

Both accounts may be suspected.  Those who are gone will endeavour by
every art to draw others after them; for as their numbers are greater,
they will provide better for themselves.  When Nova Scotia was first
peopled, I remember a letter, published under the character of a New
Planter, who related how much the climate put him in mind of Italy.  Such
intelligence the Hebridians probably receive from their transmarine
correspondents.  But with equal temptations of interest, and perhaps with
no greater niceness of veracity, the owners of the Islands spread stories
of American hardships to keep their people content at home.

Some method to stop this epidemick desire of wandering, which spreads its
contagion from valley to valley, deserves to be sought with great
diligence.  In more fruitful countries, the removal of one only makes
room for the succession of another: but in the Hebrides, the loss of an
inhabitant leaves a lasting vacuity; for nobody born in any other parts
of the world will choose this country for his residence, and an Island
once depopulated will remain a desert, as long as the present facility of
travel gives every one, who is discontented and unsettled, the choice of
his abode.

Let it be inquired, whether the first intention of those who are
fluttering on the wing, and collecting a flock that they may take their
flight, be to attain good, or to avoid evil.  If they are dissatisfied
with that part of the globe, which their birth has allotted them, and
resolve not to live without the pleasures of happier climates; if they
long for bright suns, and calm skies, and flowery fields, and fragrant
gardens, I know not by what eloquence they can be persuaded, or by what
offers they can be hired to stay.

But if they are driven from their native country by positive evils, and
disgusted by ill-treatment, real or imaginary, it were fit to remove
their grievances, and quiet their resentment; since, if they have been
hitherto undutiful subjects, they will not much mend their principles by
American conversation.

To allure them into the army, it was thought proper to indulge them in
the continuance of their national dress.  If this concession could have
any effect, it might easily be made.  That dissimilitude of appearance,
which was supposed to keep them distinct from the rest of the nation,
might disincline them from coalescing with the Pensylvanians, or people
of Connecticut.  If the restitution of their arms will reconcile them to
their country, let them have again those weapons, which will not be more
mischievous at home than in the Colonies.  That they may not fly from the
increase of rent, I know not whether the general good does not require
that the landlords be, for a time, restrained in their demands, and kept
quiet by pensions proportionate to their loss.

To hinder insurrection, by driving away the people, and to govern
peaceably, by having no subjects, is an expedient that argues no great
profundity of politicks.  To soften the obdurate, to convince the
mistaken, to mollify the resentful, are worthy of a statesman; but it
affords a legislator little self-applause to consider, that where there
was formerly an insurrection, there is now a wilderness.

It has been a question often agitated without solution, why those
northern regions are now so thinly peopled, which formerly overwhelmed
with their armies the Roman empire.  The question supposes what I believe
is not true, that they had once more inhabitants than they could
maintain, and overflowed only because they were full.

This is to estimate the manners of all countries and ages by our own.
Migration, while the state of life was unsettled, and there was little
communication of intelligence between distant places, was among the
wilder nations of Europe, capricious and casual.  An adventurous
projector heard of a fertile coast unoccupied, and led out a colony; a
chief of renown for bravery, called the young men together, and led them
out to try what fortune would present.  When Caesar was in Gaul, he found
the Helvetians preparing to go they knew not whither, and put a stop to
their motions.  They settled again in their own country, where they were
so far from wanting room, that they had accumulated three years provision
for their march.

The religion of the North was military; if they could not find enemies,
it was their duty to make them: they travelled in quest of danger, and
willingly took the chance of Empire or Death.  If their troops were
numerous, the countries from which they were collected are of vast
extent, and without much exuberance of people great armies may be raised
where every man is a soldier.  But their true numbers were never known.
Those who were conquered by them are their historians, and shame may have
excited them to say, that they were overwhelmed with multitudes.  To
count is a modern practice, the ancient method was to guess; and when
numbers are guessed they are always magnified.

Thus England has for several years been filled with the atchievements of
seventy thousand Highlanders employed in America.  I have heard from an
English officer, not much inclined to favour them, that their behaviour
deserved a very high degree of military praise; but their number has been
much exaggerated.  One of the ministers told me, that seventy thousand
men could not have been found in all the Highlands, and that more than
twelve thousand never took the field.  Those that went to the American
war, went to destruction.  Of the old Highland regiment, consisting of
twelve hundred, only seventy-six survived to see their country again.

The Gothick swarms have at least been multiplied with equal liberality.
That they bore no great proportion to the inhabitants, in whose countries
they settled, is plain from the paucity of northern words now found in
the provincial languages.  Their country was not deserted for want of
room, because it was covered with forests of vast extent; and the first
effect of plenitude of inhabitants is the destruction of wood.  As the
Europeans spread over America the lands are gradually laid naked.

I would not be understood to say, that necessity had never any part in
their expeditions.  A nation, whose agriculture is scanty or unskilful,
may be driven out by famine.  A nation of hunters may have exhausted
their game.  I only affirm that the northern regions were not, when their
irruptions subdued the Romans, overpeopled with regard to their real
extent of territory, and power of fertility.  In a country fully
inhabited, however afterward laid waste, evident marks will remain of its
former populousness.  But of Scandinavia and Germany, nothing is known
but that as we trace their state upwards into antiquity, their woods were
greater, and their cultivated ground was less.

That causes were different from want of room may produce a general
disposition to seek another country is apparent from the present conduct
of the Highlanders, who are in some places ready to threaten a total
secession.  The numbers which have already gone, though like other
numbers they may be magnified, are very great, and such as if they had
gone together and agreed upon any certain settlement, might have founded
an independent government in the depths of the western continent.  Nor
are they only the lowest and most indigent; many men of considerable
wealth have taken with them their train of labourers and dependants; and
if they continue the feudal scheme of polity, may establish new clans in
the other hemisphere.

That the immediate motives of their desertion must be imputed to their
landlords, may be reasonably concluded, because some Lairds of more
prudence and less rapacity have kept their vassals undiminished.  From
Raasa only one man had been seduced, and at Col there was no wish to go
away.

The traveller who comes hither from more opulent countries, to speculate
upon the remains of pastoral life, will not much wonder that a common
Highlander has no strong adherence to his native soil; for of animal
enjoyments, or of physical good, he leaves nothing that he may not find
again wheresoever he may be thrown.

The habitations of men in the Hebrides may be distinguished into huts and
houses.  By a house, I mean a building with one story over another; by a
hut, a dwelling with only one floor.  The Laird, who formerly lived in a
castle, now lives in a house; sometimes sufficiently neat, but seldom
very spacious or splendid.  The Tacksmen and the Ministers have commonly
houses.  Wherever there is a house, the stranger finds a welcome, and to
the other evils of exterminating Tacksmen may be added the unavoidable
cessation of hospitality, or the devolution of too heavy a burden on the
Ministers.

Of the houses little can be said.  They are small, and by the necessity
of accumulating stores, where there are so few opportunities of purchase,
the rooms are very heterogeneously filled.  With want of cleanliness it
were ingratitude to reproach them.  The servants having been bred upon
the naked earth, think every floor clean, and the quick succession of
guests, perhaps not always over-elegant, does not allow much time for
adjusting their apartments.

Huts are of many gradations; from murky dens, to commodious dwellings.

The wall of a common hut is always built without mortar, by a skilful
adaptation of loose stones.  Sometimes perhaps a double wall of stones is
raised, and the intermediate space filled with earth.  The air is thus
completely excluded.  Some walls are, I think, formed of turfs, held
together by a wattle, or texture of twigs.  Of the meanest huts, the
first room is lighted by the entrance, and the second by the smoke hole.
The fire is usually made in the middle.  But there are huts, or dwellings
of only one story, inhabited by gentlemen, which have walls cemented with
mortar, glass windows, and boarded floors.  Of these all have chimneys,
and some chimneys have grates.

The house and the furniture are not always nicely suited.  We were driven
once, by missing a passage, to the hut of a gentleman, where, after a
very liberal supper, when I was conducted to my chamber, I found an
elegant bed of Indian cotton, spread with fine sheets.  The accommodation
was flattering; I undressed myself, and felt my feet in the mire.  The
bed stood upon the bare earth, which a long course of rain had softened
to a puddle.

In pastoral countries the condition of the lowest rank of people is
sufficiently wretched.  Among manufacturers, men that have no property
may have art and industry, which make them necessary, and therefore
valuable.  But where flocks and corn are the only wealth, there are
always more hands than work, and of that work there is little in which
skill and dexterity can be much distinguished.  He therefore who is born
poor never can be rich.  The son merely occupies the place of the father,
and life knows nothing of progression or advancement.

The petty tenants, and labouring peasants, live in miserable cabins,
which afford them little more than shelter from the storms.  The Boor of
Norway is said to make all his own utensils.  In the Hebrides, whatever
might be their ingenuity, the want of wood leaves them no materials.  They
are probably content with such accommodations as stones of different
forms and sizes can afford them.

Their food is not better than their lodging.  They seldom taste the flesh
of land animals; for here are no markets.  What each man eats is from his
own stock.  The great effect of money is to break property into small
parts.  In towns, he that has a shilling may have a piece of meat; but
where there is no commerce, no man can eat mutton but by killing a sheep.

Fish in fair weather they need not want; but, I believe, man never lives
long on fish, but by constraint; he will rather feed upon roots and
berries.

The only fewel of the Islands is peat.  Their wood is all consumed, and
coal they have not yet found.  Peat is dug out of the marshes, from the
depth of one foot to that of six.  That is accounted the best which is
nearest the surface.  It appears to be a mass of black earth held
together by vegetable fibres.  I know not whether the earth be
bituminous, or whether the fibres be not the only combustible part;
which, by heating the interposed earth red hot, make a burning mass.  The
heat is not very strong nor lasting.  The ashes are yellowish, and in a
large quantity.  When they dig peat, they cut it into square pieces, and
pile it up to dry beside the house.  In some places it has an offensive
smell.  It is like wood charked for the smith.  The common method of
making peat fires, is by heaping it on the hearth; but it burns well in
grates, and in the best houses is so used.

The common opinion is, that peat grows again where it has been cut;
which, as it seems to be chiefly a vegetable substance, is not unlikely
to be true, whether known or not to those who relate it.

There are water mills in Sky and Raasa; but where they are too far
distant, the house-wives grind their oats with a quern, or hand-mill,
which consists of two stones, about a foot and a half in diameter; the
lower is a little convex, to which the concavity of the upper must be
fitted.  In the middle of the upper stone is a round hole, and on one
side is a long handle.  The grinder sheds the corn gradually into the
hole with one hand, and works the handle round with the other.  The corn
slides down the convexity of the lower stone, and by the motion of the
upper is ground in its passage.  These stones are found in Lochabar.

The Islands afford few pleasures, except to the hardy sportsman, who can
tread the moor and climb the mountain.  The distance of one family from
another, in a country where travelling has so much difficulty, makes
frequent intercourse impracticable.  Visits last several days, and are
commonly paid by water; yet I never saw a boat furnished with benches, or
made commodious by any addition to the first fabric.  Conveniences are
not missed where they never were enjoyed.

The solace which the bagpipe can give, they have long enjoyed; but among
other changes, which the last Revolution introduced, the use of the
bagpipe begins to be forgotten.  Some of the chief families still
entertain a piper, whose office was anciently hereditary.  Macrimmon was
piper to Macleod, and Rankin to Maclean of Col.

The tunes of the bagpipe are traditional.  There has been in Sky, beyond
all time of memory, a college of pipers, under the direction of
Macrimmon, which is not quite extinct.  There was another in Mull,
superintended by Rankin, which expired about sixteen years ago.  To these
colleges, while the pipe retained its honour, the students of musick
repaired for education.  I have had my dinner exhilarated by the bagpipe,
at Armidale, at Dunvegan, and in Col.

The general conversation of the Islanders has nothing particular.  I did
not meet with the inquisitiveness of which I have read, and suspect the
judgment to have been rashly made.  A stranger of curiosity comes into a
place where a stranger is seldom seen: he importunes the people with
questions, of which they cannot guess the motive, and gazes with surprise
on things which they, having had them always before their eyes, do not
suspect of any thing wonderful.  He appears to them like some being of
another world, and then thinks it peculiar that they take their turn to
inquire whence he comes, and whither he is going.

The Islands were long unfurnished with instruction for youth, and none
but the sons of gentlemen could have any literature.  There are now
parochial schools, to which the lord of every manor pays a certain
stipend.  Here the children are taught to read; but by the rule of their
institution, they teach only English, so that the natives read a language
which they may never use or understand.  If a parish, which often
happens, contains several Islands, the school being but in one, cannot
assist the rest.  This is the state of Col, which, however, is more
enlightened than some other places; for the deficiency is supplied by a
young gentleman, who, for his own improvement, travels every year on foot
over the Highlands to the session at Aberdeen; and at his return, during
the vacation, teaches to read and write in his native Island.

In Sky there are two grammar schools, where boarders are taken to be
regularly educated.  The price of board is from three pounds, to four
pounds ten shillings a year, and that of instruction is half a crown a
quarter.  But the scholars are birds of passage, who live at school only
in the summer; for in winter provisions cannot be made for any
considerable number in one place.  This periodical dispersion impresses
strongly the scarcity of these countries.

Having heard of no boarding-school for ladies nearer than Inverness, I
suppose their education is generally domestick.  The elder daughters of
the higher families are sent into the world, and may contribute by their
acquisitions to the improvement of the rest.

Women must here study to be either pleasing or useful.  Their
deficiencies are seldom supplied by very liberal fortunes.  A hundred
pounds is a portion beyond the hope of any but the Laird's daughter.  They
do not indeed often give money with their daughters; the question is, How
many cows a young lady will bring her husband.  A rich maiden has from
ten to forty; but two cows are a decent fortune for one who pretends to
no distinction.

The religion of the Islands is that of the Kirk of Scotland.  The
gentlemen with whom I conversed are all inclined to the English liturgy;
but they are obliged to maintain the established Minister, and the
country is too poor to afford payment to another, who must live wholly on
the contribution of his audience.

They therefore all attend the worship of the Kirk, as often as a visit
from their Minister, or the practicability of travelling gives them
opportunity; nor have they any reason to complain of insufficient
pastors; for I saw not one in the Islands, whom I had reason to think
either deficient in learning, or irregular in life: but found several
with whom I could not converse without wishing, as my respect increased,
that they had not been Presbyterians.

The ancient rigour of puritanism is now very much relaxed, though all are
not yet equally enlightened.  I sometimes met with prejudices
sufficiently malignant, but they were prejudices of ignorance.  The
Ministers in the Islands had attained such knowledge as may justly be
admired in men, who have no motive to study, but generous curiosity, or,
what is still better, desire of usefulness; with such politeness as so
narrow a circle of converse could not have supplied, but to minds
naturally disposed to elegance.

Reason and truth will prevail at last.  The most learned of the Scottish
Doctors would now gladly admit a form of prayer, if the people would
endure it.  The zeal or rage of congregations has its different degrees.
In some parishes the Lord's Prayer is suffered: in others it is still
rejected as a form; and he that should make it part of his supplication
would be suspected of heretical pravity.

The principle upon which extemporary prayer was originally introduced, is
no longer admitted.  The Minister formerly, in the effusion of his
prayer, expected immediate, and perhaps perceptible inspiration, and
therefore thought it his duty not to think before what he should say.  It
is now universally confessed, that men pray as they speak on other
occasions, according to the general measure of their abilities and
attainments.  Whatever each may think of a form prescribed by another, he
cannot but believe that he can himself compose by study and meditation a
better prayer than will rise in his mind at a sudden call; and if he has
any hope of supernatural help, why may he not as well receive it when he
writes as when he speaks?

In the variety of mental powers, some must perform extemporary prayer
with much imperfection; and in the eagerness and rashness of
contradictory opinions, if publick liturgy be left to the private
judgment of every Minister, the congregation may often be offended or
misled.

There is in Scotland, as among ourselves, a restless suspicion of popish
machinations, and a clamour of numerous converts to the Romish religion.
The report is, I believe, in both parts of the Island equally false.  The
Romish religion is professed only in Egg and Canna, two small islands,
into which the Reformation never made its way.  If any missionaries are
busy in the Highlands, their zeal entitles them to respect, even from
those who cannot think favourably of their doctrine.

The political tenets of the Islanders I was not curious to investigate,
and they were not eager to obtrude.  Their conversation is decent and
inoffensive.  They disdain to drink for their principles, and there is no
disaffection at their tables.  I never heard a health offered by a
Highlander that might not have circulated with propriety within the
precincts of the King's palace.

Legal government has yet something of novelty to which they cannot
perfectly conform.  The ancient spirit, that appealed only to the sword,
is yet among them.  The tenant of Scalpa, an island belonging to
Macdonald, took no care to bring his rent; when the landlord talked of
exacting payment, he declared his resolution to keep his ground, and
drive all intruders from the Island, and continued to feed his cattle as
on his own land, till it became necessary for the Sheriff to dislodge him
by violence.

The various kinds of superstition which prevailed here, as in all other
regions of ignorance, are by the diligence of the Ministers almost
extirpated.

Of Browny, mentioned by Martin, nothing has been heard for many years.
Browny was a sturdy Fairy; who, if he was fed, and kindly treated, would,
as they said, do a great deal of work.  They now pay him no wages, and
are content to labour for themselves.

In Troda, within these three-and-thirty years, milk was put every
Saturday for Greogach, or 'the Old Man with the Long Beard.'  Whether
Greogach was courted as kind, or dreaded as terrible, whether they meant,
by giving him the milk, to obtain good, or avert evil, I was not
informed.  The Minister is now living by whom the practice was abolished.

They have still among them a great number of charms for the cure of
different diseases; they are all invocations, perhaps transmitted to them
from the times of popery, which increasing knowledge will bring into
disuse.

They have opinions, which cannot be ranked with superstition, because
they regard only natural effects.  They expect better crops of grain, by
sowing their seed in the moon's increase.  The moon has great influence
in vulgar philosophy.  In my memory it was a precept annually given in
one of the English Almanacks, 'to kill hogs when the moon was increasing,
and the bacon would prove the better in boiling.'

We should have had little claim to the praise of curiosity, if we had not
endeavoured with particular attention to examine the question of the
Second Sight.  Of an opinion received for centuries by a whole nation,
and supposed to be confirmed through its whole descent, by a series of
successive facts, it is desirable that the truth should be established,
or the fallacy detected.

The Second Sight is an impression made either by the mind upon the eye,
or by the eye upon the mind, by which things distant or future are
perceived, and seen as if they were present.  A man on a journey far from
home falls from his horse, another, who is perhaps at work about the
house, sees him bleeding on the ground, commonly with a landscape of the
place where the accident befalls him.  Another seer, driving home his
cattle, or wandering in idleness, or musing in the sunshine, is suddenly
surprised by the appearance of a bridal ceremony, or funeral procession,
and counts the mourners or attendants, of whom, if he knows them, he
relates the names, if he knows them not, he can describe the dresses.
Things distant are seen at the instant when they happen.  Of things
future I know not that there is any rule for determining the time between
the Sight and the event.

This receptive faculty, for power it cannot be called, is neither
voluntary nor constant.  The appearances have no dependence upon choice:
they cannot be summoned, detained, or recalled.  The impression is
sudden, and the effect often painful.

By the term Second Sight, seems to be meant a mode of seeing, superadded
to that which Nature generally bestows.  In the Earse it is called
Taisch; which signifies likewise a spectre, or a vision.  I know not, nor
is it likely that the Highlanders ever examined, whether by Taisch, used
for Second Sight, they mean the power of seeing, or the thing seen.

I do not find it to be true, as it is reported, that to the Second Sight
nothing is presented but phantoms of evil.  Good seems to have the same
proportions in those visionary scenes, as it obtains in real life: almost
all remarkable events have evil for their basis; and are either miseries
incurred, or miseries escaped.  Our sense is so much stronger of what we
suffer, than of what we enjoy, that the ideas of pain predominate in
almost every mind.  What is recollection but a revival of vexations, or
history but a record of wars, treasons, and calamities?  Death, which is
considered as the greatest evil, happens to all.  The greatest good, be
it what it will, is the lot but of a part.

That they should often see death is to be expected; because death is an
event frequent and important.  But they see likewise more pleasing
incidents.  A gentleman told me, that when he had once gone far from his
own Island, one of his labouring servants predicted his return, and
described the livery of his attendant, which he had never worn at home;
and which had been, without any previous design, occasionally given him.

Our desire of information was keen, and our inquiry frequent.  Mr.
Boswell's frankness and gaiety made every body communicative; and we
heard many tales of these airy shows, with more or less evidence and
distinctness.

It is the common talk of the Lowland Scots, that the notion of the Second
Sight is wearing away with other superstitions; and that its reality is
no longer supposed, but by the grossest people.  How far its prevalence
ever extended, or what ground it has lost, I know not.  The Islanders of
all degrees, whether of rank or understanding, universally admit it,
except the Ministers, who universally deny it, and are suspected to deny
it, in consequence of a system, against conviction.  One of them honestly
told me, that he came to Sky with a resolution not to believe it.

Strong reasons for incredulity will readily occur.  This faculty of
seeing things out of sight is local, and commonly useless.  It is a
breach of the common order of things, without any visible reason or
perceptible benefit.  It is ascribed only to a people very little
enlightened; and among them, for the most part, to the mean and the
ignorant.

To the confidence of these objections it may be replied, that by
presuming to determine what is fit, and what is beneficial, they
presuppose more knowledge of the universal system than man has attained;
and therefore depend upon principles too complicated and extensive for
our comprehension; and that there can be no security in the consequence,
when the premises are not understood; that the Second Sight is only
wonderful because it is rare, for, considered in itself, it involves no
more difficulty than dreams, or perhaps than the regular exercise of the
cogitative faculty; that a general opinion of communicative impulses, or
visionary representations, has prevailed in all ages and all nations;
that particular instances have been given, with such evidence, as neither
Bacon nor Bayle has been able to resist; that sudden impressions, which
the event has verified, have been felt by more than own or publish them;
that the Second Sight of the Hebrides implies only the local frequency of
a power, which is nowhere totally unknown; and that where we are unable
to decide by antecedent reason, we must be content to yield to the force
of testimony.

By pretension to Second Sight, no profit was ever sought or gained.  It
is an involuntary affection, in which neither hope nor fear are known to
have any part.  Those who profess to feel it, do not boast of it as a
privilege, nor are considered by others as advantageously distinguished.
They have no temptation to feign; and their hearers have no motive to
encourage the imposture.

To talk with any of these seers is not easy.  There is one living in Sky,
with whom we would have gladly conversed; but he was very gross and
ignorant, and knew no English.  The proportion in these countries of the
poor to the rich is such, that if we suppose the quality to be
accidental, it can very rarely happen to a man of education; and yet on
such men it has sometimes fallen.  There is now a Second Sighted
gentleman in the Highlands, who complains of the terrors to which he is
exposed.

The foresight of the Seers is not always prescience; they are impressed
with images, of which the event only shews them the meaning.  They tell
what they have seen to others, who are at that time not more knowing than
themselves, but may become at last very adequate witnesses, by comparing
the narrative with its verification.

To collect sufficient testimonies for the satisfaction of the publick, or
of ourselves, would have required more time than we could bestow.  There
is, against it, the seeming analogy of things confusedly seen, and little
understood, and for it, the indistinct cry of national persuasion, which
may be perhaps resolved at last into prejudice and tradition.  I never
could advance my curiosity to conviction; but came away at last only
willing to believe.

As there subsists no longer in the Islands much of that peculiar and
discriminative form of life, of which the idea had delighted our
imagination, we were willing to listen to such accounts of past times as
would be given us.  But we soon found what memorials were to be expected
from an illiterate people, whose whole time is a series of distress;
where every morning is labouring with expedients for the evening; and
where all mental pains or pleasure arose from the dread of winter, the
expectation of spring, the caprices of their Chiefs, and the motions of
the neighbouring clans; where there was neither shame from ignorance, nor
pride in knowledge; neither curiosity to inquire, nor vanity to
communicate.

The Chiefs indeed were exempt from urgent penury, and daily difficulties;
and in their houses were preserved what accounts remained of past ages.
But the Chiefs were sometimes ignorant and careless, and sometimes kept
busy by turbulence and contention; and one generation of ignorance
effaces the whole series of unwritten history.  Books are faithful
repositories, which may be a while neglected or forgotten; but when they
are opened again, will again impart their instruction: memory, once
interrupted, is not to be recalled.  Written learning is a fixed
luminary, which, after the cloud that had hidden it has past away, is
again bright in its proper station.  Tradition is but a meteor, which, if
once it falls, cannot be rekindled.

It seems to be universally supposed, that much of the local history was
preserved by the Bards, of whom one is said to have been retained by
every great family.  After these Bards were some of my first inquiries;
and I received such answers as, for a while, made me please myself with
my increase of knowledge; for I had not then learned how to estimate the
narration of a Highlander.

They said that a great family had a Bard and a Senachi, who were the poet
and historian of the house; and an old gentleman told me that he
remembered one of each.  Here was a dawn of intelligence.  Of men that
had lived within memory, some certain knowledge might be attained.  Though
the office had ceased, its effects might continue; the poems might be
found, though there was no poet.

Another conversation indeed informed me, that the same man was both Bard
and Senachi.  This variation discouraged me; but as the practice might be
different in different times, or at the same time in different families,
there was yet no reason for supposing that I must necessarily sit down in
total ignorance.

Soon after I was told by a gentleman, who is generally acknowledged the
greatest master of Hebridian antiquities, that there had indeed once been
both Bards and Senachies; and that Senachi signified 'the man of talk,'
or of conversation; but that neither Bard nor Senachi had existed for
some centuries.  I have no reason to suppose it exactly known at what
time the custom ceased, nor did it probably cease in all houses at once.
But whenever the practice of recitation was disused, the works, whether
poetical or historical, perished with the authors; for in those times
nothing had been written in the Earse language.

Whether the 'Man of talk' was a historian, whose office was to tell
truth, or a story-teller, like those which were in the last century, and
perhaps are now among the Irish, whose trade was only to amuse, it now
would be vain to inquire.

Most of the domestick offices were, I believe, hereditary; and probably
the laureat of a clan was always the son of the last laureat.  The
history of the race could no otherwise be communicated, or retained; but
what genius could be expected in a poet by inheritance?

The nation was wholly illiterate.  Neither bards nor Senachies could
write or read; but if they were ignorant, there was no danger of
detection; they were believed by those whose vanity they flattered.

The recital of genealogies, which has been considered as very efficacious
to the preservation of a true series of ancestry, was anciently made,
when the heir of the family came to manly age.  This practice has never
subsisted within time of memory, nor was much credit due to such
rehearsers, who might obtrude fictitious pedigrees, either to please
their masters, or to hide the deficiency of their own memories.

Where the Chiefs of the Highlands have found the histories of their
descent is difficult to tell; for no Earse genealogy was ever written.  In
general this only is evident, that the principal house of a clan must be
very ancient, and that those must have lived long in a place, of whom it
is not known when they came thither.

Thus hopeless are all attempts to find any traces of Highland learning.
Nor are their primitive customs and ancient manner of life otherwise than
very faintly and uncertainly remembered by the present race.

The peculiarities which strike the native of a commercial country,
proceeded in a great measure from the want of money.  To the servants and
dependents that were not domesticks, and if an estimate be made from the
capacity of any of their old houses which I have seen, their domesticks
could have been but few, were appropriated certain portions of land for
their support.  Macdonald has a piece of ground yet, called the Bards or
Senachies field.  When a beef was killed for the house, particular parts
were claimed as fees by the several officers, or workmen.  What was the
right of each I have not learned.  The head belonged to the smith, and
the udder of a cow to the piper: the weaver had likewise his particular
part; and so many pieces followed these prescriptive claims, that the
Laird's was at last but little.

The payment of rent in kind has been so long disused in England, that it
is totally forgotten.  It was practised very lately in the Hebrides, and
probably still continues, not only in St. Kilda, where money is not yet
known, but in others of the smaller and remoter Islands.  It were perhaps
to be desired, that no change in this particular should have been made.
When the Laird could only eat the produce of his lands, he was under the
necessity of residing upon them; and when the tenant could not convert
his stock into more portable riches, he could never be tempted away from
his farm, from the only place where he could be wealthy.  Money confounds
subordination, by overpowering the distinctions of rank and birth, and
weakens authority by supplying power of resistance, or expedients for
escape.  The feudal system is formed for a nation employed in
agriculture, and has never long kept its hold where gold and silver have
become common.

Their arms were anciently the Glaymore, or great two-handed sword, and
afterwards the two-edged sword and target, or buckler, which was
sustained on the left arm.  In the midst of the target, which was made of
wood, covered with leather, and studded with nails, a slender lance,
about two feet long, was sometimes fixed; it was heavy and cumberous, and
accordingly has for some time past been gradually laid aside.  Very few
targets were at Culloden.  The dirk, or broad dagger, I am afraid, was of
more use in private quarrels than in battles.  The Lochaber-ax is only a
slight alteration of the old English bill.

After all that has been said of the force and terrour of the Highland
sword, I could not find that the art of defence was any part of common
education.  The gentlemen were perhaps sometimes skilful gladiators, but
the common men had no other powers than those of violence and courage.
Yet it is well known, that the onset of the Highlanders was very
formidable.  As an army cannot consist of philosophers, a panick is
easily excited by any unwonted mode of annoyance.  New dangers are
naturally magnified; and men accustomed only to exchange bullets at a
distance, and rather to hear their enemies than see them, are discouraged
and amazed when they find themselves encountered hand to hand, and catch
the gleam of steel flashing in their faces.

The Highland weapons gave opportunity for many exertions of personal
courage, and sometimes for single combats in the field; like those which
occur so frequently in fabulous wars.  At Falkirk, a gentleman now
living, was, I suppose after the retreat of the King's troops, engaged at
a distance from the rest with an Irish dragoon.  They were both skilful
swordsmen, and the contest was not easily decided: the dragoon at last
had the advantage, and the Highlander called for quarter; but quarter was
refused him, and the fight continued till he was reduced to defend
himself upon his knee.  At that instant one of the Macleods came to his
rescue; who, as it is said, offered quarter to the dragoon, but he
thought himself obliged to reject what he had before refused, and, as
battle gives little time to deliberate, was immediately killed.

Funerals were formerly solemnized by calling multitudes together, and
entertaining them at great expence.  This emulation of useless cost has
been for some time discouraged, and at last in the Isle of Sky is almost
suppressed.

Of the Earse language, as I understand nothing, I cannot say more than I
have been told.  It is the rude speech of a barbarous people, who had few
thoughts to express, and were content, as they conceived grossly, to be
grossly understood.  After what has been lately talked of Highland Bards,
and Highland genius, many will startle when they are told, that the Earse
never was a written language; that there is not in the world an Earse
manuscript a hundred years old; and that the sounds of the Highlanders
were never expressed by letters, till some little books of piety were
translated, and a metrical version of the Psalms was made by the Synod of
Argyle.  Whoever therefore now writes in this language, spells according
to his own perception of the sound, and his own idea of the power of the
letters.  The Welsh and the Irish are cultivated tongues.  The Welsh, two
hundred years ago, insulted their English neighbours for the instability
of their Orthography; while the Earse merely floated in the breath of the
people, and could therefore receive little improvement.

When a language begins to teem with books, it is tending to refinement;
as those who undertake to teach others must have undergone some labour in
improving themselves, they set a proportionate value on their own
thoughts, and wish to enforce them by efficacious expressions; speech
becomes embodied and permanent; different modes and phrases are compared,
and the best obtains an establishment.  By degrees one age improves upon
another.  Exactness is first obtained, and afterwards elegance.  But
diction, merely vocal, is always in its childhood.  As no man leaves his
eloquence behind him, the new generations have all to learn.  There may
possibly be books without a polished language, but there can be no
polished language without books.

That the Bards could not read more than the rest of their countrymen, it
is reasonable to suppose; because, if they had read, they could probably
have written; and how high their compositions may reasonably be rated, an
inquirer may best judge by considering what stores of imagery, what
principles of ratiocination, what comprehension of knowledge, and what
delicacy of elocution he has known any man attain who cannot read.  The
state of the Bards was yet more hopeless.  He that cannot read, may now
converse with those that can; but the Bard was a barbarian among
barbarians, who, knowing nothing himself, lived with others that knew no
more.

There has lately been in the Islands one of these illiterate poets, who
hearing the Bible read at church, is said to have turned the sacred
history into verse.  I heard part of a dialogue, composed by him,
translated by a young lady in Mull, and thought it had more meaning than
I expected from a man totally uneducated; but he had some opportunities
of knowledge; he lived among a learned people.  After all that has been
done for the instruction of the Highlanders, the antipathy between their
language and literature still continues; and no man that has learned only
Earse is, at this time, able to read.

The Earse has many dialects, and the words used in some Islands are not
always known in others.  In literate nations, though the pronunciation,
and sometimes the words of common speech may differ, as now in England,
compared with the South of Scotland, yet there is a written diction,
which pervades all dialects, and is understood in every province.  But
where the whole language is colloquial, he that has only one part, never
gets the rest, as he cannot get it but by change of residence.

In an unwritten speech, nothing that is not very short is transmitted
from one generation to another.  Few have opportunities of hearing a long
composition often enough to learn it, or have inclination to repeat it so
often as is necessary to retain it; and what is once forgotten is lost
for ever.  I believe there cannot be recovered, in the whole Earse
language, five hundred lines of which there is any evidence to prove them
a hundred years old.  Yet I hear that the father of Ossian boasts of two
chests more of ancient poetry, which he suppresses, because they are too
good for the English.

He that goes into the Highlands with a mind naturally acquiescent, and a
credulity eager for wonders, may come back with an opinion very different
from mine; for the inhabitants knowing the ignorance of all strangers in
their language and antiquities, perhaps are not very scrupulous adherents
to truth; yet I do not say that they deliberately speak studied
falsehood, or have a settled purpose to deceive.  They have inquired and
considered little, and do not always feel their own ignorance.  They are
not much accustomed to be interrogated by others; and seem never to have
thought upon interrogating themselves; so that if they do not know what
they tell to be true, they likewise do not distinctly perceive it to be
false.

Mr. Boswell was very diligent in his inquiries; and the result of his
investigations was, that the answer to the second question was commonly
such as nullified the answer to the first.

We were a while told, that they had an old translation of the scriptures;
and told it till it would appear obstinacy to inquire again.  Yet by
continued accumulation of questions we found, that the translation meant,
if any meaning there were, was nothing else than the Irish Bible.

We heard of manuscripts that were, or that had been in the hands of
somebody's father, or grandfather; but at last we had no reason to
believe they were other than Irish.  Martin mentions Irish, but never any
Earse manuscripts, to be found in the Islands in his time.

I suppose my opinion of the poems of Ossian is already discovered.  I
believe they never existed in any other form than that which we have
seen.  The editor, or author, never could shew the original; nor can it
be shewn by any other; to revenge reasonable incredulity, by refusing
evidence, is a degree of insolence, with which the world is not yet
acquainted; and stubborn audacity is the last refuge of guilt.  It would
be easy to shew it if he had it; but whence could it be had?  It is too
long to be remembered, and the language formerly had nothing written.  He
has doubtless inserted names that circulate in popular stories, and may
have translated some wandering ballads, if any can be found; and the
names, and some of the images being recollected, make an inaccurate
auditor imagine, by the help of Caledonian bigotry, that he has formerly
heard the whole.

I asked a very learned Minister in Sky, who had used all arts to make me
believe the genuineness of the book, whether at last he believed it
himself? but he would not answer.  He wished me to be deceived, for the
honour of his country; but would not directly and formally deceive me.
Yet has this man's testimony been publickly produced, as of one that held
Fingal to be the work of Ossian.

It is said, that some men of integrity profess to have heard parts of it,
but they all heard them when they were boys; and it was never said that
any of them could recite six lines.  They remember names, and perhaps
some proverbial sentiments; and, having no distinct ideas, coin a
resemblance without an original.  The persuasion of the Scots, however,
is far from universal; and in a question so capable of proof, why should
doubt be suffered to continue?  The editor has been heard to say, that
part of the poem was received by him, in the Saxon character.  He has
then found, by some peculiar fortune, an unwritten language, written in a
character which the natives probably never beheld.

I have yet supposed no imposture but in the publisher, yet I am far from
certainty, that some translations have not been lately made, that may now
be obtruded as parts of the original work.  Credulity on one part is a
strong temptation to deceit on the other, especially to deceit of which
no personal injury is the consequence, and which flatters the author with
his own ingenuity.  The Scots have something to plead for their easy
reception of an improbable fiction; they are seduced by their fondness
for their supposed ancestors.  A Scotchman must be a very sturdy
moralist, who does not love Scotland better than truth: he will always
love it better than inquiry; and if falsehood flatters his vanity, will
not be very diligent to detect it.  Neither ought the English to be much
influenced by Scotch authority; for of the past and present state of the
whole Earse nation, the Lowlanders are at least as ignorant as ourselves.
To be ignorant is painful; but it is dangerous to quiet our uneasiness by
the delusive opiate of hasty persuasion.

But this is the age, in which those who could not read, have been
supposed to write; in which the giants of antiquated romance have been
exhibited as realities.  If we know little of the ancient Highlanders,
let us not fill the vacuity with Ossian.  If we had not searched the
Magellanick regions, let us however forbear to people them with Patagons.

Having waited some days at Armidel, we were flattered at last with a wind
that promised to convey us to Mull.  We went on board a boat that was
taking in kelp, and left the Isle of Sky behind us.  We were doomed to
experience, like others, the danger of trusting to the wind, which blew
against us, in a short time, with such violence, that we, being no
seasoned sailors, were willing to call it a tempest.  I was sea-sick and
lay down.  Mr. Boswell kept the deck.  The master knew not well whither
to go; and our difficulties might perhaps have filled a very pathetick
page, had not Mr. Maclean of Col, who, with every other qualification
which insular life requires, is a very active and skilful mariner,
piloted us safe into his own harbour.




COL


In the morning we found ourselves under the Isle of Col, where we landed;
and passed the first day and night with Captain Maclean, a gentleman who
has lived some time in the East Indies; but having dethroned no Nabob, is
not too rich to settle in own country.

Next day the wind was fair, and we might have had an easy passage to
Mull; but having, contrarily to our own intention, landed upon a new
Island, we would not leave it wholly unexamined.  We therefore suffered
the vessel to depart without us, and trusted the skies for another wind.

Mr. Maclean of Col, having a very numerous family, has, for some time
past, resided at Aberdeen, that he may superintend their education, and
leaves the young gentleman, our friend, to govern his dominions, with the
full power of a Highland Chief.  By the absence of the Laird's family,
our entertainment was made more difficult, because the house was in a
great degree disfurnished; but young Col's kindness and activity supplied
all defects, and procured us more than sufficient accommodation.

Here I first mounted a little Highland steed; and if there had been many
spectators, should have been somewhat ashamed of my figure in the march.
The horses of the Islands, as of other barren countries, are very low:
they are indeed musculous and strong, beyond what their size gives reason
for expecting; but a bulky man upon one of their backs makes a very
disproportionate appearance.

From the habitation of Captain Maclean, we went to Grissipol, but called
by the way on Mr. Hector Maclean, the Minister of Col, whom we found in a
hut, that is, a house of only one floor, but with windows and chimney,
and not inelegantly furnished.  Mr. Maclean has the reputation of great
learning: he is seventy-seven years old, but not infirm, with a look of
venerable dignity, excelling what I remember in any other man.

His conversation was not unsuitable to his appearance.  I lost some of
his good-will, by treating a heretical writer with more regard than, in
his opinion, a heretick could deserve.  I honoured his orthodoxy, and did
not much censure his asperity.  A man who has settled his opinions, does
not love to have the tranquillity of his conviction disturbed; and at
seventy-seven it is time to be in earnest.

Mention was made of the Earse translation of the New Testament, which has
been lately published, and of which the learned Mr. Macqueen of Sky spoke
with commendation; but Mr. Maclean said he did not use it, because he
could make the text more intelligible to his auditors by an extemporary
version.  From this I inferred, that the language of the translation was
not the language of the Isle of Col.

He has no publick edifice for the exercise of his ministry; and can
officiate to no greater number, than a room can contain; and the room of
a hut is not very large.  This is all the opportunity of worship that is
now granted to the inhabitants of the Island, some of whom must travel
thither perhaps ten miles.  Two chapels were erected by their ancestors,
of which I saw the skeletons, which now stand faithful witnesses of the
triumph of the Reformation.

The want of churches is not the only impediment to piety: there is
likewise a want of Ministers.  A parish often contains more Islands than
one; and each Island can have the Minister only in its own turn.  At
Raasa they had, I think, a right to service only every third Sunday.  All
the provision made by the present ecclesiastical constitution, for the
inhabitants of about a hundred square miles, is a prayer and sermon in a
little room, once in three weeks: and even this parsimonious distribution
is at the mercy of the weather; and in those Islands where the Minister
does not reside, it is impossible to tell how many weeks or months may
pass without any publick exercise of religion.




GRISSIPOL IN COL


After a short conversation with Mr. Maclean, we went on to Grissipol, a
house and farm tenanted by Mr. Macsweyn, where I saw more of the ancient
life of a Highlander, than I had yet found.  Mrs. Macsweyn could speak no
English, and had never seen any other places than the Islands of Sky,
Mull, and Col: but she was hospitable and good-humoured, and spread her
table with sufficient liberality.  We found tea here, as in every other
place, but our spoons were of horn.

The house of Grissipol stands by a brook very clear and quick; which is,
I suppose, one of the most copious streams in the Island.  This place was
the scene of an action, much celebrated in the traditional history of
Col, but which probably no two relaters will tell alike.

Some time, in the obscure ages, Macneil of Barra married the Lady
Maclean, who had the Isle of Col for her jointure.  Whether Macneil
detained Col, when the widow was dead, or whether she lived so long as to
make her heirs impatient, is perhaps not now known.  The younger son,
called John Gerves, or John the Giant, a man of great strength who was
then in Ireland, either for safety, or for education, dreamed of
recovering his inheritance; and getting some adventurers together, which,
in those unsettled times, was not hard to do, invaded Col.  He was driven
away, but was not discouraged, and collecting new followers, in three
years came again with fifty men.  In his way he stopped at Artorinish in
Morvern, where his uncle was prisoner to Macleod, and was then with his
enemies in a tent.  Maclean took with him only one servant, whom he
ordered to stay at the outside; and where he should see the tent pressed
outwards, to strike with his dirk, it being the intention of Maclean, as
any man provoked him, to lay hands upon him, and push him back.  He
entered the tent alone, with his Lochabar-axe in his hand, and struck
such terror into the whole assembly, that they dismissed his uncle.

When he landed at Col, he saw the sentinel, who kept watch towards the
sea, running off to Grissipol, to give Macneil, who was there with a
hundred and twenty men, an account of the invasion.  He told Macgill, one
of his followers, that if he intercepted that dangerous intelligence, by
catching the courier, he would give him certain lands in Mull.  Upon this
promise, Macgill pursued the messenger, and either killed, or stopped
him; and his posterity, till very lately, held the lands in Mull.

The alarm being thus prevented, he came unexpectedly upon Macneil.  Chiefs
were in those days never wholly unprovided for an enemy.  A fight ensued,
in which one of their followers is said to have given an extraordinary
proof of activity, by bounding backwards over the brook of Grissipol.
Macneil being killed, and many of his clan destroyed, Maclean took
possession of the Island, which the Macneils attempted to conquer by
another invasion, but were defeated and repulsed.

Maclean, in his turn, invaded the estate of the Macneils, took the castle
of Brecacig, and conquered the Isle of Barra, which he held for seven
years, and then restored it to the heirs.




CASTLE OF COL


From Grissipol, Mr. Maclean conducted us to his father's seat; a neat new
house, erected near the old castle, I think, by the last proprietor.  Here
we were allowed to take our station, and lived very commodiously, while
we waited for moderate weather and a fair wind, which we did not so soon
obtain, but we had time to get some information of the present state of
Col, partly by inquiry, and partly by occasional excursions.

Col is computed to be thirteen miles in length, and three in breadth.
Both the ends are the property of the Duke of Argyle, but the middle
belongs to Maclean, who is called Col, as the only Laird.

Col is not properly rocky; it is rather one continued rock, of a surface
much diversified with protuberances, and covered with a thin layer of
earth, which is often broken, and discovers the stone.  Such a soil is
not for plants that strike deep roots; and perhaps in the whole Island
nothing has ever yet grown to the height of a table.  The uncultivated
parts are clothed with heath, among which industry has interspersed spots
of grass and corn; but no attempt has yet been made to raise a tree.
Young Col, who has a very laudable desire of improving his patrimony,
purposes some time to plant an orchard; which, if it be sheltered by a
wall, may perhaps succeed.  He has introduced the culture of turnips, of
which he has a field, where the whole work was performed by his own hand.
His intention is to provide food for his cattle in the winter.  This
innovation was considered by Mr. Macsweyn as the idle project of a young
head, heated with English fancies; but he has now found that turnips will
really grow, and that hungry sheep and cows will really eat them.

By such acquisitions as these, the Hebrides may in time rise above their
annual distress.  Wherever heath will grow, there is reason to think
something better may draw nourishment; and by trying the production of
other places, plants will be found suitable to every soil.

Col has many lochs, some of which have trouts and eels, and others have
never yet been stocked; another proof of the negligence of the Islanders,
who might take fish in the inland waters, when they cannot go to sea.

Their quadrupeds are horses, cows, sheep, and goats.  They have neither
deer, hares, nor rabbits.  They have no vermin, except rats, which have
been lately brought thither by sea, as to other places; and are free from
serpents, frogs, and toads.

The harvest in Col, and in Lewis, is ripe sooner than in Sky; and the
winter in Col is never cold, but very tempestuous.  I know not that I
ever heard the wind so loud in any other place; and Mr. Boswell observed,
that its noise was all its own, for there were no trees to increase it.

Noise is not the worst effect of the tempests; for they have thrown the
sand from the shore over a considerable part of the land; and it is said
still to encroach and destroy more and more pasture; but I am not of
opinion, that by any surveys or landmarks, its limits have been ever
fixed, or its progression ascertained.  If one man has confidence enough
to say, that it advances, nobody can bring any proof to support him in
denying it.  The reason why it is not spread to a greater extent, seems
to be, that the wind and rain come almost together, and that it is made
close and heavy by the wet before the storms can put it in motion.  So
thick is the bed, and so small the particles, that if a traveller should
be caught by a sudden gust in dry weather, he would find it very
difficult to escape with life.

For natural curiosities, I was shown only two great masses of stone,
which lie loose upon the ground; one on the top of a hill, and the other
at a small distance from the bottom.  They certainly were never put into
their present places by human strength or skill; and though an earthquake
might have broken off the lower stone, and rolled it into the valley, no
account can be given of the other, which lies on the hill, unless, which
I forgot to examine, there be still near it some higher rock, from which
it might be torn.  All nations have a tradition, that their earliest
ancestors were giants, and these stones are said to have been thrown up
and down by a giant and his mistress.  There are so many more important
things, of which human knowledge can give no account, that it may be
forgiven us, if we speculate no longer on two stones in Col.

This Island is very populous.  About nine-and-twenty years ago, the
fencible men of Col were reckoned one hundred and forty, which is the
sixth of eight hundred and forty; and probably some contrived to be left
out of the list.  The Minister told us, that a few years ago the
inhabitants were eight hundred, between the ages of seven and of seventy.
Round numbers are seldom exact.  But in this case the authority is good,
and the errour likely to be little.  If to the eight hundred be added
what the laws of computation require, they will be increased to at least
a thousand; and if the dimensions of the country have been accurately
related, every mile maintains more than twenty-five.

This proportion of habitation is greater than the appearance of the
country seems to admit; for wherever the eye wanders, it sees much waste
and little cultivation.  I am more inclined to extend the land, of which
no measure has ever been taken, than to diminish the people, who have
been really numbered.  Let it be supposed, that a computed mile contains
a mile and a half, as was commonly found true in the mensuration of the
English roads, and we shall then allot nearly twelve to a mile, which
agrees much better with ocular observation.

Here, as in Sky, and other Islands, are the Laird, the Tacksmen, and the
under tenants.

Mr. Maclean, the Laird, has very extensive possessions, being proprietor,
not only of far the greater part of Col, but of the extensive Island of
Rum, and a very considerable territory in Mull.

Rum is one of the larger Islands, almost square, and therefore of great
capacity in proportion to its sides.  By the usual method of estimating
computed extent, it may contain more than a hundred and twenty square
miles.

It originally belonged to Clanronald, and was purchased by Col; who, in
some dispute about the bargain, made Clanronald prisoner, and kept him
nine months in confinement.  Its owner represents it as mountainous,
rugged, and barren.  In the hills there are red deer.  The horses are
very small, but of a breed eminent for beauty.  Col, not long ago, bought
one of them from a tenant; who told him, that as he was of a shape
uncommonly elegant, he could not sell him but at a high price; and that
whoever had him should pay a guinea and a half.

There are said to be in Barra a race of horses yet smaller, of which the
highest is not above thirty-six inches.

The rent of Rum is not great.  Mr. Maclean declared, that he should be
very rich, if he could set his land at two-pence halfpenny an acre.  The
inhabitants are fifty-eight families, who continued Papists for some time
after the Laird became a Protestant.  Their adherence to their old
religion was strengthened by the countenance of the Laird's sister, a
zealous Romanist, till one Sunday, as they were going to mass under the
conduct of their patroness, Maclean met them on the way, gave one of them
a blow on the head with a yellow stick, I suppose a cane, for which the
Earse had no name, and drove them to the kirk, from which they have never
since departed.  Since the use of this method of conversion, the
inhabitants of Egg and Canna, who continue Papists, call the
Protestantism of Rum, the religion of the Yellow Stick.

The only Popish Islands are Egg and Canna.  Egg is the principal Island
of a parish, in which, though he has no congregation, the Protestant
Minister resides.  I have heard of nothing curious in it, but the cave in
which a former generation of the Islanders were smothered by Macleod.

If we had travelled with more leisure, it had not been fit to have
neglected the Popish Islands.  Popery is favourable to ceremony; and
among ignorant nations, ceremony is the only preservative of tradition.
Since protestantism was extended to the savage parts of Scotland, it has
perhaps been one of the chief labours of the Ministers to abolish stated
observances, because they continued the remembrance of the former
religion.  We therefore who came to hear old traditions, and see
antiquated manners, should probably have found them amongst the Papists.

Canna, the other Popish Island, belongs to Clanronald.  It is said not to
comprise more than twelve miles of land, and yet maintains as many
inhabitants as Rum.

We were at Col under the protection of the young Laird, without any of
the distresses, which Mr. Pennant, in a fit of simple credulity, seems to
think almost worthy of an elegy by Ossian.  Wherever we roved, we were
pleased to see the reverence with which his subjects regarded him.  He
did not endeavour to dazzle them by any magnificence of dress: his only
distinction was a feather in his bonnet; but as soon as he appeared, they
forsook their work and clustered about him: he took them by the hand, and
they seemed mutually delighted.  He has the proper disposition of a
Chieftain, and seems desirous to continue the customs of his house.  The
bagpiper played regularly, when dinner was served, whose person and dress
made a good appearance; and he brought no disgrace upon the family of
Rankin, which has long supplied the Lairds of Col with hereditary musick.

The Tacksmen of Col seem to live with less dignity and convenience than
those of Sky; where they had good houses, and tables not only plentiful,
but delicate.  In Col only two houses pay the window tax; for only two
have six windows, which, I suppose, are the Laird's and Mr. Macsweyn's.

The rents have, till within seven years, been paid in kind, but the
tenants finding that cattle and corn varied in their price, desired for
the future to give their landlord money; which, not having yet arrived at
the philosophy of commerce, they consider as being every year of the same
value.

We were told of a particular mode of under-tenure.  The Tacksman admits
some of his inferior neighbours to the cultivation of his grounds, on
condition that performing all the work, and giving a third part of the
seed, they shall keep a certain number of cows, sheep, and goats, and
reap a third part of the harvest.  Thus by less than the tillage of two
acres they pay the rent of one.

There are tenants below the rank of Tacksmen, that have got smaller
tenants under them; for in every place, where money is not the general
equivalent, there must be some whose labour is immediately paid by daily
food.

A country that has no money, is by no means convenient for beggars, both
because such countries are commonly poor, and because charity requires
some trouble and some thought.  A penny is easily given upon the first
impulse of compassion, or impatience of importunity; but few will
deliberately search their cupboards or their granaries to find out
something to give.  A penny is likewise easily spent, but victuals, if
they are unprepared, require houseroom, and fire, and utensils, which the
beggar knows not where to find.

Yet beggars there sometimes are, who wander from Island to Island.  We
had, in our passage to Mull, the company of a woman and her child, who
had exhausted the charity of Col.  The arrival of a beggar on an Island
is accounted a sinistrous event.  Every body considers that he shall have
the less for what he gives away.  Their alms, I believe, is generally
oatmeal.

Near to Col is another Island called Tireye, eminent for its fertility.
Though it has but half the extent of Rum, it is so well peopled, that
there have appeared, not long ago, nine hundred and fourteen at a
funeral.  The plenty of this Island enticed beggars to it, who seemed so
burdensome to the inhabitants, that a formal compact was drawn up, by
which they obliged themselves to grant no more relief to casual
wanderers, because they had among them an indigent woman of high birth,
whom they considered as entitled to all that they could spare.  I have
read the stipulation, which was indited with juridical formality, but was
never made valid by regular subscription.

If the inhabitants of Col have nothing to give, it is not that they are
oppressed by their landlord: their leases seem to be very profitable.  One
farmer, who pays only seven pounds a year, has maintained seven daughters
and three sons, of whom the eldest is educated at Aberdeen for the
ministry; and now, at every vacation, opens a school in Col.

Life is here, in some respects, improved beyond the condition of some
other Islands.  In Sky what is wanted can only be bought, as the arrival
of some wandering pedlar may afford an opportunity; but in Col there is a
standing shop, and in Mull there are two.  A shop in the Islands, as in
other places of little frequentation, is a repository of every thing
requisite for common use.  Mr. Boswell's journal was filled, and he
bought some paper in Col.  To a man that ranges the streets of London,
where he is tempted to contrive wants, for the pleasure of supplying
them, a shop affords no image worthy of attention; but in an Island, it
turns the balance of existence between good and evil.  To live in
perpetual want of little things, is a state not indeed of torture, but of
constant vexation.  I have in Sky had some difficulty to find ink for a
letter; and if a woman breaks her needle, the work is at a stop.

As it is, the Islanders are obliged to content themselves with
succedaneous means for many common purposes.  I have seen the chief man
of a very wide district riding with a halter for a bridle, and governing
his hobby with a wooden curb.

The people of Col, however, do not want dexterity to supply some of their
necessities.  Several arts which make trades, and demand apprenticeships
in great cities, are here the practices of daily economy.  In every house
candles are made, both moulded and dipped.  Their wicks are small shreds
of linen cloth.  They all know how to extract from the Cuddy, oil for
their lamps.  They all tan skins, and make brogues.

As we travelled through Sky, we saw many cottages, but they very
frequently stood single on the naked ground.  In Col, where the hills
opened a place convenient for habitation, we found a petty village, of
which every hut had a little garden adjoining; thus they made an
appearance of social commerce and mutual offices, and of some attention
to convenience and future supply.  There is not in the Western Islands
any collection of buildings that can make pretensions to be called a
town, except in the Isle of Lewis, which I have not seen.

If Lewis is distinguished by a town, Col has also something peculiar.  The
young Laird has attempted what no Islander perhaps ever thought on.  He
has begun a road capable of a wheel-carriage.  He has carried it about a
mile, and will continue it by annual elongation from his house to the
harbour.

Of taxes here is no reason for complaining; they are paid by a very easy
composition.  The malt-tax for Col is twenty shillings.  Whisky is very
plentiful: there are several stills in the Island, and more is made than
the inhabitants consume.

The great business of insular policy is now to keep the people in their
own country.  As the world has been let in upon them, they have heard of
happier climates, and less arbitrary government; and if they are
disgusted, have emissaries among them ready to offer them land and
houses, as a reward for deserting their Chief and clan.  Many have
departed both from the main of Scotland, and from the Islands; and all
that go may be considered as subjects lost to the British crown; for a
nation scattered in the boundless regions of America resembles rays
diverging from a focus.  All the rays remain, but the heat is gone.  Their
power consisted in their concentration: when they are dispersed, they
have no effect.

It may be thought that they are happier by the change; but they are not
happy as a nation, for they are a nation no longer.  As they contribute
not to the prosperity of any community, they must want that security,
that dignity, that happiness, whatever it be, which a prosperous
community throws back upon individuals.

The inhabitants of Col have not yet learned to be weary of their heath
and rocks, but attend their agriculture and their dairies, without
listening to American seducements.

There are some however who think that this emigration has raised terrour
disproportionate to its real evil; and that it is only a new mode of
doing what was always done.  The Highlands, they say, never maintained
their natural inhabitants; but the people, when they found themselves too
numerous, instead of extending cultivation, provided for themselves by a
more compendious method, and sought better fortune in other countries.
They did not indeed go away in collective bodies, but withdrew invisibly,
a few at a time; but the whole number of fugitives was not less, and the
difference between other times and this, is only the same as between
evaporation and effusion.

This is plausible, but I am afraid it is not true.  Those who went
before, if they were not sensibly missed, as the argument supposes, must
have gone either in less number, or in a manner less detrimental, than at
present; because formerly there was no complaint.  Those who then left
the country were generally the idle dependants on overburdened families,
or men who had no property; and therefore carried away only themselves.
In the present eagerness of emigration, families, and almost communities,
go away together.  Those who were considered as prosperous and wealthy
sell their stock and carry away the money.  Once none went away but the
useless and poor; in some parts there is now reason to fear, that none
will stay but those who are too poor to remove themselves, and too
useless to be removed at the cost of others.

Of antiquity there is not more knowledge in Col than in other places; but
every where something may be gleaned.

How ladies were portioned, when there was no money, it would be difficult
for an Englishman to guess.  In 1649, Maclean of Dronart in Mull married
his sister Fingala to Maclean of Coll, with a hundred and eighty kine;
and stipulated, that if she became a widow, her jointure should be three
hundred and sixty.  I suppose some proportionate tract of land was
appropriated to their pasturage.

The disposition to pompous and expensive funerals, which has at one time
or other prevailed in most parts of the civilized world, is not yet
suppressed in the Islands, though some of the ancient solemnities are
worn away, and singers are no longer hired to attend the procession.
Nineteen years ago, at the burial of the Laird of Col, were killed thirty
cows, and about fifty sheep.  The number of the cows is positively told,
and we must suppose other victuals in like proportion.

Mr. Maclean informed us of an odd game, of which he did not tell the
original, but which may perhaps be used in other places, where the reason
of it is not yet forgot.  At New-year's eve, in the hall or castle of the
Laird, where, at festal seasons, there may be supposed a very numerous
company, one man dresses himself in a cow's hide, upon which other men
beat with sticks.  He runs with all this noise round the house, which all
the company quits in a counterfeited fright: the door is then shut.  At
New-year's eve there is no great pleasure to be had out of doors in the
Hebrides.  They are sure soon to recover from their terrour enough to
solicit for re-admission; which, for the honour of poetry, is not to be
obtained but by repeating a verse, with which those that are knowing and
provident take care to be furnished.

Very near the house of Maclean stands the castle of Col, which was the
mansion of the Laird, till the house was built.  It is built upon a rock,
as Mr. Boswell remarked, that it might not be mined.  It is very strong,
and having been not long uninhabited, is yet in repair.  On the wall was,
not long ago, a stone with an inscription, importing, that 'if any man of
the clan of Maclonich shall appear before this castle, though he come at
midnight, with a man's head in his hand, he shall there find safety and
protection against all but the King.'

This is an old Highland treaty made upon a very memorable occasion.
Maclean, the son of John Gerves, who recovered Col, and conquered Barra,
had obtained, it is said, from James the Second, a grant of the lands of
Lochiel, forfeited, I suppose, by some offence against the state.

Forfeited estates were not in those days quietly resigned; Maclean,
therefore, went with an armed force to seize his new possessions, and, I
know not for what reason, took his wife with him.  The Camerons rose in
defence of their Chief, and a battle was fought at the head of Loch Ness,
near the place where Fort Augustus now stands, in which Lochiel obtained
the victory, and Maclean, with his followers, was defeated and destroyed.

The lady fell into the hands of the conquerours, and being found pregnant
was placed in the custody of Maclonich, one of a tribe or family branched
from Cameron, with orders, if she brought a boy, to destroy him, if a
girl, to spare her.

Maclonich's wife, who was with child likewise, had a girl about the same
time at which lady Maclean brought a boy, and Maclonich with more
generosity to his captive, than fidelity to his trust, contrived that the
children should be changed.

Maclean being thus preserved from death, in time recovered his original
patrimony; and in gratitude to his friend, made his castle a place of
refuge to any of the clan that should think himself in danger; and, as a
proof of reciprocal confidence, Maclean took upon himself and his
posterity the care of educating the heir of Maclonich.

This story, like all other traditions of the Highlands, is variously
related, but though some circumstances are uncertain, the principal fact
is true.  Maclean undoubtedly owed his preservation to Maclonich; for the
treaty between the two families has been strictly observed: it did not
sink into disuse and oblivion, but continued in its full force while the
chieftains retained their power.  I have read a demand of protection,
made not more than thirty-seven years ago, for one of the Maclonichs,
named Ewen Cameron, who had been accessory to the death of Macmartin, and
had been banished by Lochiel, his lord, for a certain term; at the
expiration of which he returned married from France, but the Macmartins,
not satisfied with the punishment, when he attempted to settle, still
threatened him with vengeance.  He therefore asked, and obtained shelter
in the Isle of Col.

The power of protection subsists no longer, but what the law permits is
yet continued, and Maclean of Col now educates the heir of Maclonich.

There still remains in the Islands, though it is passing fast away, the
custom of fosterage.  A Laird, a man of wealth and eminence, sends his
child, either male or female, to a tacksman, or tenant, to be fostered.
It is not always his own tenant, but some distant friend that obtains
this honour; for an honour such a trust is very reasonably thought.  The
terms of fosterage seem to vary in different islands.  In Mull, the
father sends with his child a certain number of cows, to which the same
number is added by the fosterer.  The father appropriates a
proportionable extent of ground, without rent, for their pasturage.  If
every cow brings a calf, half belongs to the fosterer, and half to the
child; but if there be only one calf between two cows, it is the child's,
and when the child returns to the parent, it is accompanied by all the
cows given, both by the father and by the fosterer, with half of the
increase of the stock by propagation.  These beasts are considered as a
portion, and called Macalive cattle, of which the father has the produce,
but is supposed not to have the full property, but to owe the same number
to the child, as a portion to the daughter, or a stock for the son.

Children continue with the fosterer perhaps six years, and cannot, where
this is the practice, be considered as burdensome.  The fosterer, if he
gives four cows, receives likewise four, and has, while the child
continues with him, grass for eight without rent, with half the calves,
and all the milk, for which he pays only four cows when he dismisses his
Dalt, for that is the name for a foster child.

Fosterage is, I believe, sometimes performed upon more liberal terms.  Our
friend, the young Laird of Col, was fostered by Macsweyn of Grissipol.
Macsweyn then lived a tenant to Sir James Macdonald in the Isle of Sky;
and therefore Col, whether he sent him cattle or not, could grant him no
land.  The Dalt, however, at his return, brought back a considerable
number of Macalive cattle, and of the friendship so formed there have
been good effects.  When Macdonald raised his rents, Macsweyn was, like
other tenants, discontented, and, resigning his farm, removed from Sky to
Col, and was established at Grissipol.

These observations we made by favour of the contrary wind that drove us
to Col, an Island not often visited; for there is not much to amuse
curiosity, or to attract avarice.

The ground has been hitherto, I believe, used chiefly for pasturage.  In
a district, such as the eye can command, there is a general herdsman, who
knows all the cattle of the neighbourhood, and whose station is upon a
hill, from which he surveys the lower grounds; and if one man's cattle
invade another's grass, drives them back to their own borders.  But other
means of profit begin to be found; kelp is gathered and burnt, and sloops
are loaded with the concreted ashes.  Cultivation is likely to be
improved by the skill and encouragement of the present heir, and the
inhabitants of those obscure vallies will partake of the general progress
of life.

The rents of the parts which belong to the Duke of Argyle, have been
raised from fifty-five to one hundred and five pounds, whether from the
land or the sea I cannot tell.  The bounties of the sea have lately been
so great, that a farm in Southuist has risen in ten years from a rent of
thirty pounds to one hundred and eighty.

He who lives in Col, and finds himself condemned to solitary meals, and
incommunicable reflection, will find the usefulness of that middle order
of Tacksmen, which some who applaud their own wisdom are wishing to
destroy.  Without intelligence man is not social, he is only gregarious;
and little intelligence will there be, where all are constrained to daily
labour, and every mind must wait upon the hand.

After having listened for some days to the tempest, and wandered about
the Island till our curiosity was satisfied, we began to think about our
departure.  To leave Col in October was not very easy.  We however found
a sloop which lay on the coast to carry kelp; and for a price which we
thought levied upon our necessities, the master agreed to carry us to
Mull, whence we might readily pass back to Scotland.




MULL


As we were to catch the first favourable breath, we spent the night not
very elegantly nor pleasantly in the vessel, and were landed next day at
Tobor Morar, a port in Mull, which appears to an unexperienced eye formed
for the security of ships; for its mouth is closed by a small island,
which admits them through narrow channels into a bason sufficiently
capacious.  They are indeed safe from the sea, but there is a hollow
between the mountains, through which the wind issues from the land with
very mischievous violence.

There was no danger while we were there, and we found several other
vessels at anchor; so that the port had a very commercial appearance.

The young Laird of Col, who had determined not to let us lose his
company, while there was any difficulty remaining, came over with us.  His
influence soon appeared; for he procured us horses, and conducted us to
the house of Doctor Maclean, where we found very kind entertainment, and
very pleasing conversation.  Miss Maclean, who was born, and had been
bred at Glasgow, having removed with her father to Mull, added to other
qualifications, a great knowledge of the Earse language, which she had
not learned in her childhood, but gained by study, and was the only
interpreter of Earse poetry that I could ever find.

The Isle of Mull is perhaps in extent the third of the Hebrides.  It is
not broken by waters, nor shot into promontories, but is a solid and
compact mass, of breadth nearly equal to its length.  Of the dimensions
of the larger Islands, there is no knowledge approaching to exactness.  I
am willing to estimate it as containing about three hundred square miles.

Mull had suffered like Sky by the black winter of seventy-one, in which,
contrary to all experience, a continued frost detained the snow eight
weeks upon the ground.  Against a calamity never known, no provision had
been made, and the people could only pine in helpless misery.  One tenant
was mentioned, whose cattle perished to the value of three hundred
pounds; a loss which probably more than the life of man is necessary to
repair.  In countries like these, the descriptions of famine become
intelligible.  Where by vigorous and artful cultivation of a soil
naturally fertile, there is commonly a superfluous growth both of grain
and grass; where the fields are crowded with cattle; and where every hand
is able to attract wealth from a distance, by making something that
promotes ease, or gratifies vanity, a dear year produces only a
comparative want, which is rather seen than felt, and which terminates
commonly in no worse effect, than that of condemning the lower orders of
the community to sacrifice a little luxury to convenience, or at most a
little convenience to necessity.

But where the climate is unkind, and the ground penurious, so that the
most fruitful years will produce only enough to maintain themselves;
where life unimproved, and unadorned, fades into something little more
than naked existence, and every one is busy for himself, without any arts
by which the pleasure of others may be increased; if to the daily burden
of distress any additional weight be added, nothing remains but to
despair and die.  In Mull the disappointment of a harvest, or a murrain
among the cattle, cuts off the regular provision; and they who have no
manufactures can purchase no part of the superfluities of other
countries.  The consequence of a bad season is here not scarcity, but
emptiness; and they whose plenty, was barely a supply of natural and
present need, when that slender stock fails, must perish with hunger.

All travel has its advantages.  If the passenger visits better countries,
he may learn to improve his own, and if fortune carries him to worse, he
may learn to enjoy it.

Mr. Boswell's curiosity strongly impelled him to survey Iona, or
Icolmkil, which was to the early ages the great school of Theology, and
is supposed to have been the place of sepulture for the ancient kings.  I,
though less eager, did not oppose him.

That we might perform this expedition, it was necessary to traverse a
great part of Mull.  We passed a day at Dr. Maclean's, and could have
been well contented to stay longer.  But Col provided us horses, and we
pursued our journey.  This was a day of inconvenience, for the country is
very rough, and my horse was but little.  We travelled many hours through
a tract, black and barren, in which, however, there were the reliques of
humanity; for we found a ruined chapel in our way.

It is natural, in traversing this gloom of desolation, to inquire,
whether something may not be done to give nature a more cheerful face,
and whether those hills and moors that afford heath cannot with a little
care and labour bear something better?  The first thought that occurs is
to cover them with trees, for that in many of these naked regions trees
will grow, is evident, because stumps and roots are yet remaining; and
the speculatist hastily proceeds to censure that negligence and laziness
that has omitted for so long a time so easy an improvement.

To drop seeds into the ground, and attend their growth, requires little
labour and no skill.  He who remembers that all the woods, by which the
wants of man have been supplied from the Deluge till now, were self-sown,
will not easily be persuaded to think all the art and preparation
necessary, which the Georgick writers prescribe to planters.  Trees
certainly have covered the earth with very little culture.  They wave
their tops among the rocks of Norway, and might thrive as well in the
Highlands and Hebrides.

But there is a frightful interval between the seed and timber.  He that
calculates the growth of trees, has the unwelcome remembrance of the
shortness of life driven hard upon him.  He knows that he is doing what
will never benefit himself; and when he rejoices to see the stem rise, is
disposed to repine that another shall cut it down.

Plantation is naturally the employment of a mind unburdened with care,
and vacant to futurity, saturated with present good, and at leisure to
derive gratification from the prospect of posterity.  He that pines with
hunger, is in little care how others shall be fed.  The poor man is
seldom studious to make his grandson rich.  It may be soon discovered,
why in a place, which hardly supplies the cravings of necessity, there
has been little attention to the delights of fancy, and why distant
convenience is unregarded, where the thoughts are turned with incessant
solicitude upon every possibility of immediate advantage.

Neither is it quite so easy to raise large woods, as may be conceived.
Trees intended to produce timber must be sown where they are to grow; and
ground sown with trees must be kept useless for a long time, inclosed at
an expence from which many will be discouraged by the remoteness of the
profit, and watched with that attention, which, in places where it is
most needed, will neither be given nor bought.  That it cannot be plowed
is evident; and if cattle be suffered to graze upon it, they will devour
the plants as fast as they rise.  Even in coarser countries, where herds
and flocks are not fed, not only the deer and the wild goats will browse
upon them, but the hare and rabbit will nibble them.  It is therefore
reasonable to believe, what I do not remember any naturalist to have
remarked, that there was a time when the world was very thinly inhabited
by beasts, as well as men, and that the woods had leisure to rise high
before animals had bred numbers sufficient to intercept them.

Sir James Macdonald, in part of the wastes of his territory, set or sowed
trees, to the number, as I have been told, of several millions,
expecting, doubtless, that they would grow up into future navies and
cities; but for want of inclosure, and of that care which is always
necessary, and will hardly ever be taken, all his cost and labour have
been lost, and the ground is likely to continue an useless heath.

Having not any experience of a journey in Mull, we had no doubt of
reaching the sea by day-light, and therefore had not left Dr. Maclean's
very early.  We travelled diligently enough, but found the country, for
road there was none, very difficult to pass.  We were always struggling
with some obstruction or other, and our vexation was not balanced by any
gratification of the eye or mind.  We were now long enough acquainted
with hills and heath to have lost the emotion that they once raised,
whether pleasing or painful, and had our mind employed only on our own
fatigue.  We were however sure, under Col's protection, of escaping all
real evils.  There was no house in Mull to which he could not introduce
us.  He had intended to lodge us, for that night, with a gentleman that
lived upon the coast, but discovered on the way, that he then lay in bed
without hope of life.

We resolved not to embarrass a family, in a time of so much sorrow, if
any other expedient could he found; and as the Island of Ulva was over-
against us, it was determined that we should pass the strait and have
recourse to the Laird, who, like the other gentlemen of the Islands, was
known to Col.  We expected to find a ferry-boat, but when at last we came
to the water, the boat was gone.

We were now again at a stop.  It was the sixteenth of October, a time
when it is not convenient to sleep in the Hebrides without a cover, and
there was no house within our reach, but that which we had already
declined.




ULVA


While we stood deliberating, we were happily espied from an Irish ship,
that lay at anchor in the strait.  The master saw that we wanted a
passage, and with great civility sent us his boat, which quickly conveyed
us to Ulva, where we were very liberally entertained by Mr. Macquarry.

To Ulva we came in the dark, and left it before noon the next day.  A
very exact description therefore will not be expected.  We were told,
that it is an Island of no great extent, rough and barren, inhabited by
the Macquarrys; a clan not powerful nor numerous, but of antiquity, which
most other families are content to reverence.  The name is supposed to be
a depravation of some other; for the Earse language does not afford it
any etymology.  Macquarry is proprietor both of Ulva and some adjacent
Islands, among which is Staffa, so lately raised to renown by Mr. Banks.

When the Islanders were reproached with their ignorance, or insensibility
of the wonders of Staffa, they had not much to reply.  They had indeed
considered it little, because they had always seen it; and none but
philosophers, nor they always, are struck with wonder, otherwise than by
novelty.  How would it surprise an unenlightened ploughman, to hear a
company of sober men, inquiring by what power the hand tosses a stone, or
why the stone, when it is tossed, falls to the ground!

Of the ancestors of Macquarry, who thus lies hid in his unfrequented
Island, I have found memorials in all places where they could be
expected.

Inquiring after the reliques of former manners, I found that in Ulva,
and, I think, no where else, is continued the payment of the Mercheta
Mulierum; a fine in old times due to the Laird at the marriage of a
virgin.  The original of this claim, as of our tenure of Borough English,
is variously delivered.  It is pleasant to find ancient customs in old
families.  This payment, like others, was, for want of money, made
anciently in the produce of the land.  Macquarry was used to demand a
sheep, for which he now takes a crown, by that inattention to the
uncertain proportion between the value and the denomination of money,
which has brought much disorder into Europe.  A sheep has always the same
power of supplying human wants, but a crown will bring at one time more,
at another less.

Ulva was not neglected by the piety of ardent times: it has still to show
what was once a church.




INCH KENNETH


In the morning we went again into the boat, and were landed on Inch
Kenneth, an Island about a mile long, and perhaps half a mile broad,
remarkable for pleasantness and fertility.  It is verdant and grassy, and
fit both for pasture and tillage; but it has no trees.  Its only
inhabitants were Sir Allan Maclean and two young ladies, his daughters,
with their servants.

Romance does not often exhibit a scene that strikes the imagination more
than this little desert in these depths of Western obscurity, occupied
not by a gross herdsman, or amphibious fisherman, but by a gentleman and
two ladies, of high birth, polished manners and elegant conversation,
who, in a habitation raised not very far above the ground, but furnished
with unexpected neatness and convenience, practised all the kindness of
hospitality, and refinement of courtesy.

Sir Allan is the Chieftain of the great clan of Maclean, which is said to
claim the second place among the Highland families, yielding only to
Macdonald.  Though by the misconduct of his ancestors, most of the
extensive territory, which would have descended to him, has been
alienated, he still retains much of the dignity and authority of his
birth.  When soldiers were lately wanting for the American war,
application was made to Sir Allan, and he nominated a hundred men for the
service, who obeyed the summons, and bore arms under his command.

He had then, for some time, resided with the young ladies in Inch
Kenneth, where he lives not only with plenty, but with elegance, having
conveyed to his cottage a collection of books, and what else is necessary
to make his hours pleasant.

When we landed, we were met by Sir Allan and the Ladies, accompanied by
Miss Macquarry, who had passed some time with them, and now returned to
Ulva with her father.

We all walked together to the mansion, where we found one cottage for Sir
Allan, and I think two more for the domesticks and the offices.  We
entered, and wanted little that palaces afford.  Our room was neatly
floored, and well lighted; and our dinner, which was dressed in one of
the other huts, was plentiful and delicate.

In the afternoon Sir Allan reminded us, that the day was Sunday, which he
never suffered to pass without some religious distinction, and invited us
to partake in his acts of domestick worship; which I hope neither Mr.
Boswell nor myself will be suspected of a disposition to refuse.  The
elder of the Ladies read the English service.

Inch Kenneth was once a seminary of ecclesiasticks, subordinate, I
suppose, to Icolmkill.  Sir Allan had a mind to trace the foundations of
the college, but neither I nor Mr. Boswell, who bends a keener eye on
vacancy, were able to perceive them.

Our attention, however, was sufficiently engaged by a venerable chapel,
which stands yet entire, except that the roof is gone.  It is about sixty
feet in length, and thirty in breadth.  On one side of the altar is a bas
relief of the blessed Virgin, and by it lies a little bell; which, though
cracked, and without a clapper, has remained there for ages, guarded only
by the venerableness of the place.  The ground round the chapel is
covered with gravestones of Chiefs and ladies; and still continues to be
a place of sepulture.

Inch Kenneth is a proper prelude to Icolmkill.  It was not without some
mournful emotion that we contemplated the ruins of religious structures
and the monuments of the dead.

On the next day we took a more distinct view of the place, and went with
the boat to see oysters in the bed, out of which the boatmen forced up as
many as were wanted.  Even Inch Kenneth has a subordinate Island, named
Sandiland, I suppose in contempt, where we landed, and found a rock, with
a surface of perhaps four acres, of which one is naked stone, another
spread with sand and shells, some of which I picked up for their glossy
beauty, and two covered with a little earth and grass, on which Sir Allan
has a few sheep.  I doubt not but when there was a college at Inch
Kenneth, there was a hermitage upon Sandiland.

Having wandered over those extensive plains, we committed ourselves again
to the winds and waters; and after a voyage of about ten minutes, in
which we met with nothing very observable, were again safe upon dry
ground.

We told Sir Allan our desire of visiting Icolmkill, and entreated him to
give us his protection, and his company.  He thought proper to hesitate a
little, but the Ladies hinted, that as they knew he would not finally
refuse, he would do better if he preserved the grace of ready compliance.
He took their advice, and promised to carry us on the morrow in his boat.

We passed the remaining part of the day in such amusements as were in our
power.  Sir Allan related the American campaign, and at evening one of
the Ladies played on her harpsichord, while Col and Mr. Boswell danced a
Scottish reel with the other.

We could have been easily persuaded to a longer stay upon Inch Kenneth,
but life will not be all passed in delight.  The session at Edinburgh was
approaching, from which Mr. Boswell could not be absent.

In the morning our boat was ready: it was high and strong.  Sir Allan
victualled it for the day, and provided able rowers.  We now parted from
the young Laird of Col, who had treated us with so much kindness, and
concluded his favours by consigning us to Sir Allan.  Here we had the
last embrace of this amiable man, who, while these pages were preparing
to attest his virtues, perished in the passage between Ulva and Inch
Kenneth.

Sir Allan, to whom the whole region was well known, told us of a very
remarkable cave, to which he would show us the way.  We had been
disappointed already by one cave, and were not much elevated by the
expectation of another.

It was yet better to see it, and we stopped at some rocks on the coast of
Mull.  The mouth is fortified by vast fragments of stone, over which we
made our way, neither very nimbly, nor very securely.  The place,
however, well repaid our trouble.  The bottom, as far as the flood rushes
in, was encumbered with large pebbles, but as we advanced was spread over
with smooth sand.  The breadth is about forty-five feet: the roof rises
in an arch, almost regular, to a height which we could not measure; but I
think it about thirty feet.

This part of our curiosity was nearly frustrated; for though we went to
see a cave, and knew that caves are dark, we forgot to carry tapers, and
did not discover our omission till we were wakened by our wants.  Sir
Allan then sent one of the boatmen into the country, who soon returned
with one little candle.  We were thus enabled to go forward, but could
not venture far.  Having passed inward from the sea to a great depth, we
found on the right hand a narrow passage, perhaps not more than six feet
wide, obstructed by great stones, over which we climbed and came into a
second cave, in breadth twenty-five feet.  The air in this apartment was
very warm, but not oppressive, nor loaded with vapours.  Our light showed
no tokens of a feculent or corrupted atmosphere.  Here was a square
stone, called, as we are told, Fingal's Table.

If we had been provided with torches, we should have proceeded in our
search, though we had already gone as far as any former adventurer,
except some who are reported never to have returned; and, measuring our
way back, we found it more than a hundred and sixty yards, the eleventh
part of a mile.

Our measures were not critically exact, having been made with a walking
pole, such as it is convenient to carry in these rocky countries, of
which I guessed the length by standing against it.  In this there could
be no great errour, nor do I much doubt but the Highlander, whom we
employed, reported the number right.  More nicety however is better, and
no man should travel unprovided with instruments for taking heights and
distances.

There is yet another cause of errour not always easily surmounted, though
more dangerous to the veracity of itinerary narratives, than imperfect
mensuration.  An observer deeply impressed by any remarkable spectacle,
does not suppose, that the traces will soon vanish from his mind, and
having commonly no great convenience for writing, defers the description
to a time of more leisure, and better accommodation.

He who has not made the experiment, or who is not accustomed to require
rigorous accuracy from himself, will scarcely believe how much a few
hours take from certainty of knowledge, and distinctness of imagery; how
the succession of objects will be broken, how separate parts will be
confused, and how many particular features and discriminations will be
compressed and conglobated into one gross and general idea.

To this dilatory notation must be imputed the false relations of
travellers, where there is no imaginable motive to deceive.  They trusted
to memory, what cannot be trusted safely but to the eye, and told by
guess what a few hours before they had known with certainty.  Thus it was
that Wheeler and Spon described with irreconcilable contrariety things
which they surveyed together, and which both undoubtedly designed to show
as they saw them.

When we had satisfied our curiosity in the cave, so far as our penury of
light permitted us, we clambered again to our boat, and proceeded along
the coast of Mull to a headland, called Atun, remarkable for the columnar
form of the rocks, which rise in a series of pilasters, with a degree of
regularity, which Sir Allan thinks not less worthy of curiosity than the
shore of Staffa.

Not long after we came to another range of black rocks, which had the
appearance of broken pilasters, set one behind another to a great depth.
This place was chosen by Sir Allan for our dinner.  We were easily
accommodated with seats, for the stones were of all heights, and
refreshed ourselves and our boatmen, who could have no other rest till we
were at Icolmkill.

The evening was now approaching, and we were yet at a considerable
distance from the end of our expedition.  We could therefore stop no more
to make remarks in the way, but set forward with some degree of
eagerness.  The day soon failed us, and the moon presented a very solemn
and pleasing scene.  The sky was clear, so that the eye commanded a wide
circle: the sea was neither still nor turbulent: the wind neither silent
nor loud.  We were never far from one coast or another, on which, if the
weather had become violent, we could have found shelter, and therefore
contemplated at ease the region through which we glided in the
tranquillity of the night, and saw now a rock and now an island grow
gradually conspicuous and gradually obscure.  I committed the fault which
I have just been censuring, in neglecting, as we passed, to note the
series of this placid navigation.

We were very near an Island, called Nun's Island, perhaps from an ancient
convent.  Here is said to have been dug the stone that was used in the
buildings of Icolmkill.  Whether it is now inhabited we could not stay to
inquire.

At last we came to Icolmkill, but found no convenience for landing.  Our
boat could not be forced very near the dry ground, and our Highlanders
carried us over the water.

We were now treading that illustrious Island, which was once the luminary
of the Caledonian regions, whence savage clans and roving barbarians
derived the benefits of knowledge, and the blessings of religion.  To
abstract the mind from all local emotion would be impossible, if it were
endeavoured, and would be foolish, if it were possible.  Whatever
withdraws us from the power of our senses; whatever makes the past, the
distant, or the future predominate over the present, advances us in the
dignity of thinking beings.  Far from me and from my friends, be such
frigid philosophy as may conduct us indifferent and unmoved over any
ground which has been dignified by wisdom, bravery, or virtue.  That man
is little to be envied, whose patriotism would not gain force upon the
plain of Marathon, or whose piety would not grow warmer among the ruins
of Iona!

We came too late to visit monuments: some care was necessary for
ourselves.  Whatever was in the Island, Sir Allan could command, for the
inhabitants were Macleans; but having little they could not give us much.
He went to the headman of the Island, whom Fame, but Fame delights in
amplifying, represents as worth no less than fifty pounds.  He was
perhaps proud enough of his guests, but ill prepared for our
entertainment; however, he soon produced more provision than men not
luxurious require.  Our lodging was next to be provided.  We found a barn
well stocked with hay, and made our beds as soft as we could.

In the morning we rose and surveyed the place.  The churches of the two
convents are both standing, though unroofed.  They were built of unhewn
stone, but solid, and not inelegant.  I brought away rude measures of the
buildings, such as I cannot much trust myself, inaccurately taken, and
obscurely noted.  Mr. Pennant's delineations, which are doubtless exact,
have made my unskilful description less necessary.

The episcopal church consists of two parts, separated by the belfry, and
built at different times.  The original church had, like others, the
altar at one end, and tower at the other: but as it grew too small,
another building of equal dimension was added, and the tower then was
necessarily in the middle.

That these edifices are of different ages seems evident.  The arch of the
first church is Roman, being part of a circle; that of the additional
building is pointed, and therefore Gothick, or Saracenical; the tower is
firm, and wants only to be floored and covered.

Of the chambers or cells belonging to the monks, there are some walls
remaining, but nothing approaching to a complete apartment.

The bottom of the church is so incumbered with mud and rubbish, that we
could make no discoveries of curious inscriptions, and what there are
have been already published.  The place is said to be known where the
black stones lie concealed, on which the old Highland Chiefs, when they
made contracts and alliances, used to take the oath, which was considered
as more sacred than any other obligation, and which could not be violated
without the blackest infamy.  In those days of violence and rapine, it
was of great importance to impress upon savage minds the sanctity of an
oath, by some particular and extraordinary circumstances.  They would not
have recourse to the black stones, upon small or common occasions, and
when they had established their faith by this tremendous sanction,
inconstancy and treachery were no longer feared.

The chapel of the nunnery is now used by the inhabitants as a kind of
general cow-house, and the bottom is consequently too miry for
examination.  Some of the stones which covered the later abbesses have
inscriptions, which might yet be read, if the chapel were cleansed.  The
roof of this, as of all the other buildings, is totally destroyed, not
only because timber quickly decays when it is neglected, but because in
an island utterly destitute of wood, it was wanted for use, and was
consequently the first plunder of needy rapacity.

The chancel of the nuns' chapel is covered with an arch of stone, to
which time has done no injury; and a small apartment communicating with
the choir, on the north side, like the chapter-house in cathedrals,
roofed with stone in the same manner, is likewise entire.

In one of the churches was a marble altar, which the superstition of the
inhabitants has destroyed.  Their opinion was, that a fragment of this
stone was a defence against shipwrecks, fire, and miscarriages.  In one
corner of the church the bason for holy water is yet unbroken.

The cemetery of the nunnery was, till very lately, regarded with such
reverence, that only women were buried in it.  These reliques of
veneration always produce some mournful pleasure.  I could have forgiven
a great injury more easily than the violation of this imaginary sanctity.

South of the chapel stand the walls of a large room, which was probably
the hall, or refectory of the nunnery.  This apartment is capable of
repair.  Of the rest of the convent there are only fragments.

Besides the two principal churches, there are, I think, five chapels yet
standing, and three more remembered.  There are also crosses, of which
two bear the names of St. John and St. Matthew.

A large space of ground about these consecrated edifices is covered with
gravestones, few of which have any inscription.  He that surveys it,
attended by an insular antiquary, may be told where the Kings of many
nations are buried, and if he loves to sooth his imagination with the
thoughts that naturally rise in places where the great and the powerful
lie mingled with the dust, let him listen in submissive silence; for if
he asks any questions, his delight is at an end.

Iona has long enjoyed, without any very credible attestation, the honour
of being reputed the cemetery of the Scottish Kings.  It is not unlikely,
that, when the opinion of local sanctity was prevalent, the Chieftains of
the Isles, and perhaps some of the Norwegian or Irish princes were
reposited in this venerable enclosure.  But by whom the subterraneous
vaults are peopled is now utterly unknown.  The graves are very numerous,
and some of them undoubtedly contain the remains of men, who did not
expect to be so soon forgotten.

Not far from this awful ground, may be traced the garden of the
monastery: the fishponds are yet discernible, and the aqueduct, which
supplied them, is still in use.

There remains a broken building, which is called the Bishop's house, I
know not by what authority.  It was once the residence of some man above
the common rank, for it has two stories and a chimney.  We were shewn a
chimney at the other end, which was only a nich, without perforation, but
so much does antiquarian credulity, or patriotick vanity prevail, that it
was not much more safe to trust the eye of our instructor than the
memory.

There is in the Island one house more, and only one, that has a chimney:
we entered it, and found it neither wanting repair nor inhabitants; but
to the farmers, who now possess it, the chimney is of no great value; for
their fire was made on the floor, in the middle of the room, and
notwithstanding the dignity of their mansion, they rejoiced, like their
neighbours, in the comforts of smoke.

It is observed, that ecclesiastical colleges are always in the most
pleasant and fruitful places.  While the world allowed the monks their
choice, it is surely no dishonour that they chose well.  This Island is
remarkably fruitful.  The village near the churches is said to contain
seventy families, which, at five in a family, is more than a hundred
inhabitants to a mile.  There are perhaps other villages: yet both corn
and cattle are annually exported.

But the fruitfulness of Iona is now its whole prosperity.  The
inhabitants are remarkably gross, and remarkably neglected: I know not if
they are visited by any Minister.  The Island, which was once the
metropolis of learning and piety, has now no school for education, nor
temple for worship, only two inhabitants that can speak English, and not
one that can write or read.

The people are of the clan of Maclean; and though Sir Allan had not been
in the place for many years, he was received with all the reverence due
to their Chieftain.  One of them being sharply reprehended by him, for
not sending him some rum, declared after his departure, in Mr. Boswell's
presence, that he had no design of disappointing him, 'for,' said he, 'I
would cut my bones for him; and if he had sent his dog for it, he should
have had it.'

When we were to depart, our boat was left by the ebb at a great distance
from the water, but no sooner did we wish it afloat, than the islanders
gathered round it, and, by the union of many hands, pushed it down the
beach; every man who could contribute his help seemed to think himself
happy in the opportunity of being, for a moment, useful to his Chief.

We now left those illustrious ruins, by which Mr. Boswell was much
affected, nor would I willingly be thought to have looked upon them
without some emotion.  Perhaps, in the revolutions of the world, Iona may
be sometime again the instructress of the Western Regions.

It was no long voyage to Mull, where, under Sir Allan's protection, we
landed in the evening, and were entertained for the night by Mr. Maclean,
a Minister that lives upon the coast, whose elegance of conversation, and
strength of judgment, would make him conspicuous in places of greater
celebrity.  Next day we dined with Dr. Maclean, another physician, and
then travelled on to the house of a very powerful Laird, Maclean of
Lochbuy; for in this country every man's name is Maclean.

Where races are thus numerous, and thus combined, none but the Chief of a
clan is addressed by his name.  The Laird of Dunvegan is called Macleod,
but other gentlemen of the same family are denominated by the places
where they reside, as Raasa, or Talisker.  The distinction of the meaner
people is made by their Christian names.  In consequence of this
practice, the late Laird of Macfarlane, an eminent genealogist,
considered himself as disrespectfully treated, if the common addition was
applied to him.  Mr. Macfarlane, said he, may with equal propriety be
said to many; but I, and I only, am Macfarlane.

Our afternoon journey was through a country of such gloomy desolation,
that Mr. Boswell thought no part of the Highlands equally terrifick, yet
we came without any difficulty, at evening, to Lochbuy, where we found a
true Highland Laird, rough and haughty, and tenacious of his dignity;
who, hearing my name, inquired whether I was of the Johnstons of
Glencroe, or of Ardnamurchan.

Lochbuy has, like the other insular Chieftains, quitted the castle that
sheltered his ancestors, and lives near it, in a mansion not very
spacious or splendid.  I have seen no houses in the Islands much to be
envied for convenience or magnificence, yet they bare testimony to the
progress of arts and civility, as they shew that rapine and surprise are
no longer dreaded, and are much more commodious than the ancient
fortresses.

The castles of the Hebrides, many of which are standing, and many ruined,
were always built upon points of land, on the margin of the sea.  For the
choice of this situation there must have been some general reason, which
the change of manners has left in obscurity.  They were of no use in the
days of piracy, as defences of the coast; for it was equally accessible
in other places.  Had they been sea-marks or light-houses, they would
have been of more use to the invader than the natives, who could want no
such directions of their own waters: for a watch-tower, a cottage on a
hill would have been better, as it would have commanded a wider view.

If they be considered merely as places of retreat, the situation seems
not well chosen; for the Laird of an Island is safest from foreign
enemies in the center; on the coast he might be more suddenly surprised
than in the inland parts; and the invaders, if their enterprise
miscarried, might more easily retreat.  Some convenience, however,
whatever it was, their position on the shore afforded; for uniformity of
practice seldom continues long without good reason.

A castle in the Islands is only a single tower of three or four stories,
of which the walls are sometimes eight or nine feet thick, with narrow
windows, and close winding stairs of stone.  The top rises in a cone, or
pyramid of stone, encompassed by battlements.  The intermediate floors
are sometimes frames of timber, as in common houses, and sometimes arches
of stone, or alternately stone and timber; so that there was very little
danger from fire.  In the center of every floor, from top to bottom, is
the chief room, of no great extent, round which there are narrow
cavities, or recesses, formed by small vacuities, or by a double wall.  I
know not whether there be ever more than one fire-place.  They had not
capacity to contain many people, or much provision; but their enemies
could seldom stay to blockade them; for if they failed in the first
attack, their next care was to escape.

The walls were always too strong to be shaken by such desultory
hostilities; the windows were too narrow to be entered, and the
battlements too high to be scaled.  The only danger was at the gates,
over which the wall was built with a square cavity, not unlike a chimney,
continued to the top.  Through this hollow the defendants let fall stones
upon those who attempted to break the gate, and poured down water,
perhaps scalding water, if the attack was made with fire.  The castle of
Lochbuy was secured by double doors, of which the outer was an iron
grate.

In every castle is a well and a dungeon.  The use of the well is evident.
The dungeon is a deep subterraneous cavity, walled on the sides, and
arched on the top, into which the descent is through a narrow door, by a
ladder or a rope, so that it seems impossible to escape, when the rope or
ladder is drawn up.  The dungeon was, I suppose, in war, a prison for
such captives as were treated with severity, and, in peace, for such
delinquents as had committed crimes within the Laird's jurisdiction; for
the mansions of many Lairds were, till the late privation of their
privileges, the halls of justice to their own tenants.

As these fortifications were the productions of mere necessity, they are
built only for safety, with little regard to convenience, and with none
to elegance or pleasure.  It was sufficient for a Laird of the Hebrides,
if he had a strong house, in which he could hide his wife and children
from the next clan.  That they are not large nor splendid is no wonder.
It is not easy to find how they were raised, such as they are, by men who
had no money, in countries where the labourers and artificers could
scarcely be fed.  The buildings in different parts of the Island shew
their degrees of wealth and power.  I believe that for all the castles
which I have seen beyond the Tweed, the ruins yet remaining of some one
of those which the English built in Wales, would supply materials.

These castles afford another evidence that the fictions of romantick
chivalry had for their basis the real manners of the feudal times, when
every Lord of a seignory lived in his hold lawless and unaccountable,
with all the licentiousness and insolence of uncontested superiority and
unprincipled power.  The traveller, whoever he might be, coming to the
fortified habitation of a Chieftain, would, probably, have been
interrogated from the battlements, admitted with caution at the gate,
introduced to a petty Monarch, fierce with habitual hostility, and
vigilant with ignorant suspicion; who, according to his general temper,
or accidental humour, would have seated a stranger as his guest at the
table, or as a spy confined him in the dungeon.

Lochbuy means the Yellow Lake, which is the name given to an inlet of the
sea, upon which the castle of Mr. Maclean stands.  The reason of the
appellation we did not learn.

We were now to leave the Hebrides, where we had spent some weeks with
sufficient amusement, and where we had amplified our thoughts with new
scenes of nature, and new modes of life.  More time would have given us a
more distinct view, but it was necessary that Mr. Boswell should return
before the courts of justice were opened; and it was not proper to live
too long upon hospitality, however liberally imparted.

Of these Islands it must be confessed, that they have not many
allurements, but to the mere lover of naked nature.  The inhabitants are
thin, provisions are scarce, and desolation and penury give little
pleasure.

The people collectively considered are not few, though their numbers are
small in proportion to the space which they occupy.  Mull is said to
contain six thousand, and Sky fifteen thousand.  Of the computation
respecting Mull, I can give no account; but when I doubted the truth of
the numbers attributed to Sky, one of the Ministers exhibited such facts
as conquered my incredulity.

Of the proportion, which the product of any region bears to the people,
an estimate is commonly made according to the pecuniary price of the
necessaries of life; a principle of judgment which is never certain,
because it supposes what is far from truth, that the value of money is
always the same, and so measures an unknown quantity by an uncertain
standard.  It is competent enough when the markets of the same country,
at different times, and those times not too distant, are to be compared;
but of very little use for the purpose of making one nation acquainted
with the state of another.  Provisions, though plentiful, are sold in
places of great pecuniary opulence for nominal prices, to which, however
scarce, where gold and silver are yet scarcer, they can never be raised.

In the Western Islands there is so little internal commerce, that hardly
any thing has a known or settled rate.  The price of things brought in,
or carried out, is to be considered as that of a foreign market; and even
this there is some difficulty in discovering, because their denominations
of quantity are different from ours; and when there is ignorance on both
sides, no appeal can be made to a common measure.

This, however, is not the only impediment.  The Scots, with a vigilance
of jealousy which never goes to sleep, always suspect that an Englishman
despises them for their poverty, and to convince him that they are not
less rich than their neighbours, are sure to tell him a price higher than
the true.  When Lesley, two hundred years ago, related so punctiliously,
that a hundred hen eggs, new laid, were sold in the Islands for a peny,
he supposed that no inference could possibly follow, but that eggs were
in great abundance.  Posterity has since grown wiser; and having learned,
that nominal and real value may differ, they now tell no such stories,
lest the foreigner should happen to collect, not that eggs are many, but
that pence are few.

Money and wealth have by the use of commercial language been so long
confounded, that they are commonly supposed to be the same; and this
prejudice has spread so widely in Scotland, that I know not whether I
found man or woman, whom I interrogated concerning payments of money,
that could surmount the illiberal desire of deceiving me, by representing
every thing as dearer than it is.

From Lochbuy we rode a very few miles to the side of Mull, which faces
Scotland, where, having taken leave of our kind protector, Sir Allan, we
embarked in a boat, in which the seat provided for our accommodation was
a heap of rough brushwood; and on the twenty-second of October reposed at
a tolerable inn on the main land.

On the next day we began our journey southwards.  The weather was
tempestuous.  For half the day the ground was rough, and our horses were
still small.  Had they required much restraint, we might have been
reduced to difficulties; for I think we had amongst us but one bridle.  We
fed the poor animals liberally, and they performed their journey well.  In
the latter part of the day, we came to a firm and smooth road, made by
the soldiers, on which we travelled with great security, busied with
contemplating the scene about us.  The night came on while we had yet a
great part of the way to go, though not so dark, but that we could
discern the cataracts which poured down the hills, on one side, and fell
into one general channel that ran with great violence on the other.  The
wind was loud, the rain was heavy, and the whistling of the blast, the
fall of the shower, the rush of the cataracts, and the roar of the
torrent, made a nobler chorus of the rough musick of nature than it had
ever been my chance to hear before.  The streams, which ran cross the way
from the hills to the main current, were so frequent, that after a while
I began to count them; and, in ten miles, reckoned fifty-five, probably
missing some, and having let some pass before they forced themselves upon
my notice.  At last we came to Inverary, where we found an inn, not only
commodious, but magnificent.

The difficulties of peregrination were now at an end.  Mr. Boswell had
the honour of being known to the Duke of Argyle, by whom we were very
kindly entertained at his splendid seat, and supplied with conveniences
for surveying his spacious park and rising forests.

After two days stay at Inverary we proceeded Southward over Glencroe, a
black and dreary region, now made easily passable by a military road,
which rises from either end of the glen by an acclivity not dangerously
steep, but sufficiently laborious.  In the middle, at the top of the
hill, is a seat with this inscription, 'Rest, and be thankful.'  Stones
were placed to mark the distances, which the inhabitants have taken away,
resolved, they said, 'to have no new miles.'

In this rainy season the hills streamed with waterfalls, which, crossing
the way, formed currents on the other side, that ran in contrary
directions as they fell to the north or south of the summit.  Being, by
the favour of the Duke, well mounted, I went up and down the hill with
great convenience.

From Glencroe we passed through a pleasant country to the banks of Loch
Lomond, and were received at the house of Sir James Colquhoun, who is
owner of almost all the thirty islands of the Loch, which we went in a
boat next morning to survey.  The heaviness of the rain shortened our
voyage, but we landed on one island planted with yew, and stocked with
deer, and on another containing perhaps not more than half an acre,
remarkable for the ruins of an old castle, on which the osprey builds her
annual nest.  Had Loch Lomond been in a happier climate, it would have
been the boast of wealth and vanity to own one of the little spots which
it incloses, and to have employed upon it all the arts of embellishment.
But as it is, the islets, which court the gazer at a distance, disgust
him at his approach, when he finds, instead of soft lawns; and shady
thickets, nothing more than uncultivated ruggedness.

Where the Loch discharges itself into a river, called the Leven, we
passed a night with Mr. Smollet, a relation of Doctor Smollet, to whose
memory he has raised an obelisk on the bank near the house in which he
was born.  The civility and respect which we found at every place, it is
ungrateful to omit, and tedious to repeat.  Here we were met by a post-
chaise, that conveyed us to Glasgow.

To describe a city so much frequented as Glasgow, is unnecessary.  The
prosperity of its commerce appears by the greatness of many private
houses, and a general appearance of wealth.  It is the only episcopal
city whose cathedral was left standing in the rage of Reformation.  It is
now divided into many separate places of worship, which, taken all
together, compose a great pile, that had been some centuries in building,
but was never finished; for the change of religion intercepted its
progress, before the cross isle was added, which seems essential to a
Gothick cathedral.

The college has not had a sufficient share of the increasing magnificence
of the place.  The session was begun; for it commences on the tenth of
October and continues to the tenth of June, but the students appeared not
numerous, being, I suppose, not yet returned from their several homes.
The division of the academical year into one session, and one recess,
seems to me better accommodated to the present state of life, than that
variegation of time by terms and vacations derived from distant
centuries, in which it was probably convenient, and still continued in
the English universities.  So many solid months as the Scotch scheme of
education joins together, allow and encourage a plan for each part of the
year; but with us, he that has settled himself to study in the college is
soon tempted into the country, and he that has adjusted his life in the
country, is summoned back to his college.

Yet when I have allowed to the universities of Scotland a more rational
distribution of time, I have given them, so far as my inquiries have
informed me, all that they can claim.  The students, for the most part,
go thither boys, and depart before they are men; they carry with them
little fundamental knowledge, and therefore the superstructure cannot be
lofty.  The grammar schools are not generally well supplied; for the
character of a school-master being there less honourable than in England,
is seldom accepted by men who are capable to adorn it, and where the
school has been deficient, the college can effect little.

Men bred in the universities of Scotland cannot be expected to be often
decorated with the splendours of ornamental erudition, but they obtain a
mediocrity of knowledge, between learning and ignorance, not inadequate
to the purposes of common life, which is, I believe, very widely diffused
among them, and which countenanced in general by a national combination
so invidious, that their friends cannot defend it, and actuated in
particulars by a spirit of enterprise, so vigorous, that their enemies
are constrained to praise it, enables them to find, or to make their way
to employment, riches, and distinction.

From Glasgow we directed our course to Auchinleck, an estate devolved,
through a long series of ancestors, to Mr. Boswell's father, the present
possessor.  In our way we found several places remarkable enough in
themselves, but already described by those who viewed them at more
leisure, or with much more skill; and stopped two days at Mr. Campbell's,
a gentleman married to Mr. Boswell's sister.

Auchinleck, which signifies a stony field, seems not now to have any
particular claim to its denomination.  It is a district generally level,
and sufficiently fertile, but like all the Western side of Scotland,
incommoded by very frequent rain.  It was, with the rest of the country,
generally naked, till the present possessor finding, by the growth of
some stately trees near his old castle, that the ground was favourable
enough to timber, adorned it very diligently with annual plantations.

Lord Auchinleck, who is one of the Judges of Scotland, and therefore not
wholly at leisure for domestick business or pleasure, has yet found time
to make improvements in his patrimony.  He has built a house of hewn
stone, very stately, and durable, and has advanced the value of his lands
with great tenderness to his tenants.

I was, however, less delighted with the elegance of the modern mansion,
than with the sullen dignity of the old castle.  I clambered with Mr.
Boswell among the ruins, which afford striking images of ancient life.  It
is, like other castles, built upon a point of rock, and was, I believe,
anciently surrounded with a moat.  There is another rock near it, to
which the drawbridge, when it was let down, is said to have reached.
Here, in the ages of tumult and rapine, the Laird was surprised and
killed by the neighbouring Chief, who perhaps might have extinguished the
family, had he not in a few days been seized and hanged, together with
his sons, by Douglas, who came with his forces to the relief of
Auchinleck.

At no great distance from the house runs a pleasing brook, by a red rock,
out of which has been hewn a very agreeable and commodious summer-house,
at less expence, as Lord Auchinleck told me, than would have been
required to build a room of the same dimensions.  The rock seems to have
no more dampness than any other wall.  Such opportunities of variety it
is judicious not to neglect.

We now returned to Edinburgh, where I passed some days with men of
learning, whose names want no advancement from my commemoration, or with
women of elegance, which perhaps disclaims a pedant's praise.

The conversation of the Scots grows every day less unpleasing to the
English; their peculiarities wear fast away; their dialect is likely to
become in half a century provincial and rustick, even to themselves.  The
great, the learned, the ambitious, and the vain, all cultivate the
English phrase, and the English pronunciation, and in splendid companies
Scotch is not much heard, except now and then from an old Lady.

There is one subject of philosophical curiosity to be found in Edinburgh,
which no other city has to shew; a college of the deaf and dumb, who are
taught to speak, to read, to write, and to practice arithmetick, by a
gentleman, whose name is Braidwood.  The number which attends him is, I
think, about twelve, which he brings together into a little school, and
instructs according to their several degrees of proficiency.

I do not mean to mention the instruction of the deaf as new.  Having been
first practised upon the son of a constable of Spain, it was afterwards
cultivated with much emulation in England, by Wallis and Holder, and was
lately professed by Mr. Baker, who once flattered me with hopes of seeing
his method published.  How far any former teachers have succeeded, it is
not easy to know; the improvement of Mr. Braidwood's pupils is wonderful.
They not only speak, write, and understand what is written, but if he
that speaks looks towards them, and modifies his organs by distinct and
full utterance, they know so well what is spoken, that it is an
expression scarcely figurative to say, they hear with the eye.  That any
have attained to the power mentioned by Burnet, of feeling sounds, by
laying a hand on the speaker's mouth, I know not; but I have seen so
much, that I can believe more; a single word, or a short sentence, I
think, may possibly be so distinguished.

It will readily be supposed by those that consider this subject, that Mr.
Braidwood's scholars spell accurately.  Orthography is vitiated among
such as learn first to speak, and then to write, by imperfect notions of
the relation between letters and vocal utterance; but to those students
every character is of equal importance; for letters are to them not
symbols of names, but of things; when they write they do not represent a
sound, but delineate a form.

This school I visited, and found some of the scholars waiting for their
master, whom they are said to receive at his entrance with smiling
countenances and sparkling eyes, delighted with the hope of new ideas.
One of the young Ladies had her slate before her, on which I wrote a
question consisting of three figures, to be multiplied by two figures.
She looked upon it, and quivering her fingers in a manner which I thought
very pretty, but of which I know not whether it was art or play,
multiplied the sum regularly in two lines, observing the decimal place;
but did not add the two lines together, probably disdaining so easy an
operation.  I pointed at the place where the sum total should stand, and
she noted it with such expedition as seemed to shew that she had it only
to write.

It was pleasing to see one of the most desperate of human calamities
capable of so much help; whatever enlarges hope, will exalt courage;
after having seen the deaf taught arithmetick, who would be afraid to
cultivate the Hebrides?

Such are the things which this journey has given me an opportunity of
seeing, and such are the reflections which that sight has raised.  Having
passed my time almost wholly in cities, I may have been surprised by
modes of life and appearances of nature, that are familiar to men of
wider survey and more varied conversation.  Novelty and ignorance must
always be reciprocal, and I cannot but be conscious that my thoughts on
national manners, are the thoughts of one who has seen but little.
